A Hello, everyone. My guest is Professor Raji Batra from University of Michigan
Ross Business School. He is an expert on
brand building, global branding and advertising, and we're talking about
branding strategy today. Thank you, Raji for joining me today and let's get started
with my first question. Why is brand strategy
important for brand building? All right. Well, thank you
for inviting me to do this. I'm looking forward to sharing some ideas with your students. I'm going to bring up
my PowerPoint screen. Let's see if that works. So we'll go here. Share and go to the
slide. Is that working? Yes. Okay. Great. All right. The question is why is brand strategy important
in brand building? The way to motivate
this, I think, is to show this logo, this history of the
logos that Google has used ever since that
brand was founded. Let me ask your students, what is the most obvious
characteristic of the Google logo and I'll
pause here for 15 seconds. What I hear back
from my students when I ask them
this question is, they all point to
the fact that it has multiple colors in it. Then I ask them, why do you think it has these
multiple colors? Why do you think Google
chose to create a logo with multiple colors
instead of just one color, black, blue, red, whatever. The answer I get back is, well, Google is trying to communicate that it is a creative
organization. Because when you think
of multiple colors, you think of children playing
with crayons and making nice pictures and having
a sense of playfulness, a sense of fun, a
sense of creativity. That I think illustrates how brand strategy connects with brand expression
or brand creation. Because before you do
anything to build a brand, you need to know what type of brand are you
trying to build. And so what is a
brand, after all? A brand is not a
physical object. A brand is what
is in the mind of the consumer when they
see your visual identity, when they see your packaging, your logo, your advertising,
something else. So uh, you as the brand builder
need to know in advance, what am I trying to create? What do I want my
consumers to think and feel when they see my brand? Because that's what my brand is. It's the associations. This vision of what
is it that you want your target customers
to think and feel about your brand
is brand strategy. Right? And the idea is
that brand strategy has to precede has to come before the brand creation or what
people call brand expression. Brand expression means you bring the brand to life
through what you do. Through what you do
with the product, the packaging, the name, the visual identity, your
advertising and communication. Then if it's a service brand, the employees you select, the retail
environments you have, all those things that
bring a brand to life. Before you do any of that, you need to think
through what is my desired brand meaning? What do I want my
brand to mean to consumers when they see the visual representation
of that brand? That's the brand strategy piece. It's analytical,
it's more rational. There are obviously
some insights involved, but you have to think about let me think of who my
target customer is. Let me think of who my competitors
are given all of that, let me analyze and strategize on what does my
brand need to come across as so that consumers will choose my brand
over competitive brands. That's basically what a
brand strategy process is. Once you've thought about that, then you become creative in
terms of how you actually create the brand which your customers will
experience. The totality. Everything you do
is what leads to that brand impression that
the customers experience. There's an example
on this slide of the brand of wine that maybe your students
are familiar with, which is the yellow tail brand. It's a cheap $910 bottle
of wine in mass retail. The story behind it is that the Australian winery,
which came up with this, went into the
American marketplace at a time when the
market was growing, the wine market was
growing and it was growing because they saw
the data because consumers who were giving up consumers who are actually beer drinkers were
switching to wine. Then they thought, Okay, to win these people, what
do we need to be? They said, Well,
if you're coming from the beer drinking crowd, you're looking for
something informal, casual, not something
overly sophisticated. How do we signal and
create that we are an informal type of wine. They said, Well, we are from Australia and when people
think of Australia, they think of people who are informal and casual
and friendly. We need to evoke Australia
in people's minds. What do people think of when
they think of Australia? They think of kangaroos. So we need to have a kangaroo. Apparently, somewhere
in Australia, kangaroos are called
yellow tails. That's how they came up with this bright image of this kangaroo and they
called it yellow tail. You'll notice that yellow tail, the brand name is in lower case, it's not uppercase, and
that was deliberately chosen because they want to signal informality
and friendliness. So you can see how the tactics, the name, the logo, the font, all these things came from a prior decision on what type of wine
brand are we creating? What do we want people
to think of and feel when they encounter
our brand in the store. So that's why brand strategy has to come first before you do any brand expression
and brand creation. So I'm going to use the word brand strategy
and brand meaning interchangeably because
brand meaning refers to what do I want consumers
to think my brand stands for, which is what my
strategy leads to. Strong brand meaning
is very important. If you look at the lower
row of this slide, you look at these three
automotive luxury brands, Acura, BMW and Infinity. If I ask you, which of
these three brands is the strongest brand
I think you would agree that BMW is arguably
the strongest brand. Then if I said, do you
know what BMW stands for, what the brand
meaning is of BMW, most people would say, yes, BMW is known for decades as the ultimate
driving machine, driving excitement, performance,
those kind of things. In contrast, if I ask you
what does infinity stand for? Most people don't have a clue. What does ICRA stand for? Most people don't have a clue. It's very important to think through what you want
your brand to mean and then that transfers to the actual brand creation steps that a brand manager takes. In the upper row, you have the two leading global
smartphone brands. You have Apple and Samsung, and imagine a Chinese brand like Huawei wanted to
build a global brand, which is, in fact,
what they're trying to do right now with
their smartphones. They have to think through what brand meaning they
want to give Huawei. That's why I pick that
as an example because any new brand needs to think through who are my competitors, who are my customers, and therefore, what kind of
brand meaning do I need to strategize and come
up with before I actually go and start
building my brand. So go ahead, please can interrupt with a question
the question I had in mind, how do you decide what your brand strategy or
brand meaning should be? Exactly. That's what we're
going to right now is, how do you decide
what my brand should mean and what the brand strategy
should be for your brand? The answer to your question
is you need to do a lot of planning and research
and analysis. That's what I'm going
to move into now, which is the planning
and research part of how this gets done. So let's think
about the players, if you will, who
need to enter into this analysis of what
should my brand meaning be? What should my
brand strategy be? Imagine you are this
new entrant into the global smartphone business
like Huawei from China. You're looking at, who
are you thinking about? First of all, who
are my customers? On the one hand and you see that at the top of this pyramid, who are the customers? Which customer segment
do I want to go after? Do I want to target?
Later in this deck, I have some slides on how
you make that decision. But let's assume for
a minute now you made that decision on which customer segment you want to target. I know in your class, you're
covering this in terms of the standard segmentation, targeting, positioning analysis. On the other hand, you have competitive
brands because you're not the only one
that's trying to win the business from these
targeted customer segments. You have lots of
competitive brands. Given the fact that you have competitive brands on one side, that you have to beat for the business from this targeted customer segment
that you're trying to win, what should be the criteria that you need to
think about to arrive at a brand meaning or brand strategy that makes sense strategically
in this situation. I'm going to pause for 10 seconds so people
can think about that. Then we'll continue. Okay. I hope you've thought
about this a little bit. Now let's see what the
criteria would be. So to win a target
customer segment, clearly, whatever your brand meaning or brand strategy or brand
promise or brand message, people use different terms is against that targeted
customer segment, it needs, first of all, to be
relevant to what they are looking for in that product
category, like smartphones. Relevance is one
important criteria. The second one though, is beyond relevance
is that they may be, this is not the case
for every single brand, but they may well be in this category, an
emotional component. Relevance is typically more
of functional characteristic. Then the second one is
there some emotional power, some emotional
motivating element that they're looking
for in that category. That may be applicable in
almost every product category, not necessarily every
single product category. That's why on the side of the pyramid where we relate
your brand to your segment, we have in this framework, it needs your brand message, your brand position,
your brand strategy, it needs to be relevant to
the needs that this segment has and it also needs to
meet the emotional needs, not just the functional needs. Now, on the other side, which is your brand, relative to the competition, you can't be the same as the competitors if
you want to win. You have to be different. Differentiation is
very important. But of course, the differentiation
has to be in a manner that's relevant and motivating
to your target segment. In addition to
differentiation, however, it needs to be the kind of differentiation which is
sustainable over time. It shouldn't be the differentiation
that one month later, each competitor of yours can
also make the same claim. It must be something that you can do better than they can. In some sense, it must
be ownable by you. It must be unique to
you, special to you. So that's why we have the
word uniqueness over there. Now there are four
criteria therefore. You need to come up with
something which is relevant to your target customers and
is emotionally motivating. In the highlight, you'll
see the color red, you'll see R and M
for those two ideas. Then below, you see differentiation from
competitors and uniqueness, specialness, and so
on and so we put a U. To make it easy for people to remember these four criteria, I just put that together as
DRM, which makes a drum. It's a nice mnemonic, it makes it easier for you to remember what these
four criteria are. A good brand strategy, a good brand meaning, a strong brand
meaning is one which differentiates you from
competitors in an ownable, unique way, and it's
also something which is relevant to consumers and motivating emotionally
to consumers. Those are the four pieces that we're trying to
talk about that we will talk about as we go
further in this discussion. Let's begin with
differentiation. How do you differentiate
your brand? How do you find something to use to differentiate your brand? Now, naturally, this means you need to analyze how you are similar to and yet different
from your competitors. So we need to do a
lot of research. If you were Huawei, you would look at the other
brands in the marketplace. You would compare
yourself to Apple and Samsung and LG and the
other Chinese brands, and you would say, Well, how do consumers perceive me and how do consumers
perceive these other brands? And so what you try
to do is you try to create what are called
an association map. So you see in the bottom of this slide, an association map. I'll talk more about
that in just a second. But you need to create this association map not
just for your brand, what do people connect with
your brand in their minds, but with the other brands
that you compete with. It's almost like there's
a competitive brandscape. Just a bit of landscape so there's a brandscape
in which you compete. What is an association map? An association map is
some representation. It doesn't have to look
like the one on the screen, but some representation
that the analysts can look at of what thoughts, feelings, what associations do people have in their minds, in their heads about the brand? This is based on actual
data, the Mayo Clinic, which is arguably the
world's most well, strongest brand in
the healthcare space. When they were
asked, what do you think of when you think
of the Mayo Clinic, they said, they have the
best doctors in the world. And then they were asked,
What does that mean to you? They said, Well, the
doctors work as a team, which helps them figure
out what's wrong with you when other doctors
can't figure that out. That's the primary,
the secondary, the tertiary associations
in their minds and so you can see that in this
visual representation. What you need to do is to get
maps like this from data. We'll talk in a minute on
how you get these maps, but from research data, you need to get them about
your brand as well as comparative brands
because you're comparing your association map with
the competitive ones. On this screen, you see three brands of three
athletic brands. You see Adidas, Nike and
Puma and for each of them, there's an association map. You need association
maps for you and the leading two
or three competitors that you compete with. You need to maybe get separate
maps for users versus non users because a comparison across those will tell you what your strengths
and weaknesses are. Um, and then maybe by segment, maybe older people,
younger people, males, females, and so on, that might give you some
insight and make sure that your association
maps include not just the positive things
that consumers think of, but also the negative things. You need to have both in
these maps when you get them. The next question is, well, how do we get the data
to create these maps? So there are lots of techniques and I'll talk about each
of them very briefly. But generally speaking, the
research process begins with qualitative research before you do any quantitative
survey research. The types of
qualitative research, I'm sure you all know
what focus groups are, depth interviews are when
you sit down one on one with the consumer and you ask the same questions
as in a focus group, but you can go
deeper because it's one person that you
can probe with. Then there is a
technique that uses picture interpretation
where you ask people go through a magazine or a website or something
and find a picture that in some ways reminds you of the brand or connects with your impression
of the brand. Then let's talk about
it. You tell me why this reminds
you of the brand. I'll give you an example
of this in just a second. Then another technique is what's called the
analogy technique. It says, If this brand was an animal, what
animal would it be? If this brand was a car,
what car would it be? Somebody might say,
this brand will be Toyota Camry and
somebody else will say, this brand is like a
porsche, then you say, well, what made you say
that they'll tell you. That gives you some
useful insight into what the associations are. A third one is where you show
people like a deck of cards and on each card is a picture of somebody, not just the face, but dressed up head to
toe and you say, Well, pick the person that
reminds you most of the brand and they'll tell you why and you talk about that. Another technique is simply free sentence complation
or word association. I'll show you an
example of that. Once you've done all that
qualitative research, then you take these findings and you develop a questionnaire, a survey, which you ask consumers to fill out and I'll show you
an example of that. You begin with the qualitative, then you go to the quantitative and you get a good sense of what is in the minds of people when they think of your brand and
competitive brands. You can put that visually. It doesn't have
to be visually in that brand association
map or you can do a Word Cloud or something
if that makes you happier. There are different
ways to do this. So this is a real example
from a student project of a picture interpretation when they were looking at a
certain brand of ice cream. I'll pause for a minute and let you think what
kind of ice cream? What brand of ice
cream do you think these pictures
collectively represent? The answer actually
is Hagan Das, you see expensive stuff. You see the American
Express card, you see people riding on horses, fine porcelain and cruise ships and fine clothing and fine art. This is all rich stuff, Hagen Das is an expensive brand of ice cream and it's formal. It's upper class,
it's sophisticated. Those are the kind
adjectives that come out in the probing of this collage. This is an example of one of the analogy techniques or what are called
projective techniques. So if Denny's, the restaurant
chain was an animal, what would it be a car? What would it be?
You look there at this Volvo looking
vehicle person, and then you say, well, what do all these images
mean people say, Oh, it seems less refined, it seems older in terms of age. Then you compare that
with Applebee's, which is more mainstream,
more suburban. Again, people make these
choices and then you talk. You say, what made
you pick this? Why did you pick this
image or this analogy? That gives you a lot
of insight into what imagery people have in their minds about different brands. Or you can go into this
very open ended exercise. You simply say,
here's a sentence. When I think of brand X,
whatever the brand is, what comes to my mind
is write down in this blank space and people will tell you
what they think of. Or you can say, I think
this brand is for me or not for me because
people fill that out. Or you say, I like this brand or dislike this brand because
they fill that out. This is all the raw data which the qualitative
techniques give you. This is what you use before you get to the
quantitative phase, which is a survey phase. A survey phase is you give people the brand
name and you say, please think of this brand as if it were a person
with a personality. How would you rate it on each of the following
personality adjectives on the scale of one to seven, where one is it does not
describe this brand at all and seven is it describes
the brand very well. Then you have a whole bunch
of adjectives, modern, conservative, old
fashioned, famous, sophisticated, down
to earth, and so on. You get people to do this both for your brand and for
competitive brands, and then you can
compare the data. Now, it shouldn't just
be brand personality. You should also be
asking questions about brand quality and brand
awareness and so on, but this is just the
brand personality side. So where do you get
these adjectives from? Some of these come from
the qualitative research because they give you
a sense of what's going on in people's heads when they think of your brand
and competitive brands. But there are actually lists of adjectives that
research has come up with, and this is an example
of one such list, you don't have to
take all of these, and you can add some that
are not on the list, but this is to help
you to come up with adjectives that might
be helpful for you to see how your
brand compares in people's minds with other
comparative brands. So once you have that data, then you can compare
the different brands. This is an actual
student project where they had data
on Adidas versus Spomer versus Reebok versus converse on the adjectives that you can see at the
bottom of the screen, and you can see how the
different brands compare to each other in terms of brand perceptions and
brand associations. This is how you get
data to help you with the differentiation
part of the brand strategy. Because first, it will tell you, is my brand seen now currently as being different in some way than
competitive brands? Or is it not?
Second, if it's not, then it should give you some triggers to think about, well, how can I make my brand differentiated from
competitive brands? Where do I need to be
more differentiated? But this is the raw
data that leads to that analytical process as part of the brand
strategy piece. This is really helpful
and interesting because it reminds me that when students
think about research, they generally think
about crunching numbers, analyzing lots of data and
all quantitative approaches. You illustrated so well how qualitative
research complements quantitative research to
unearth these brand meanings. But I was wondering, I was
thinking of a question, as you talked about
these methods. So far we've talked
about, you know, direct methods of identifying these brand meanings that
consumers assign to brands. I was curious if there
are any indirect ways of also complementing
this information. Yeah, that's a very
good question. Let me first comment on the
first thing you were saying, which is the qualitative
research is vital. You cannot do branding
strategy work without having that qualitative front end.
You have to start with that. You also start with
what is called library research or
secondary research. You see what other people have written about the category. What the trends are in
the category and so on. You have to do that
and the qualitative, then that's only
then do you move to the quantitative data
collection, the survey part. Now, to the second
part of your question, which is are there methods where you don't directly ask
people to rate brands? The answer is yes,
there are some. They have their own
advantages and disadvantages. There are at least two
types that a lot of analysts use in the
brand strategy process. One is called perceptual mapping or multidimensional scaling MDS. These terms are used
interchangeably. And the way they work is
you do not directly ask the consumer to rate the brands on different brand
personality adjectives. Instead, you ask them
for something different. One type of perceptual
mapping, there are many types. One type says, I'm
going to give you a list of brands as
pairs of brands. I'll take Nike and
Adidas, for example. And I'll ask you
on a scale to rate these two brands as how similar or dissimilar are
they to each other. I could give you one to
seven scale and one might say very dissimilar and seven
might say very similar. I give you the pair, and I say, Nike and Adidas and say Nike and Puma and Adidas and
Ribak and so on. People check these boxes, give these ratings
of how similar or dissimilar they think
these brands are. Then you take the raw
data of similarity and you give it to this statistical
technique called MDS. I'm not going to go into the
mathematics behind this, but basically what it tries
to do is it tries to create a visual map that puts
brands on the map, you see on the screen
on the left hand side, BMW and Porsche on the left hand side are close to each other on the
top right hand side. And then on the bottom left, you see that Plymouth and Dodge and Ford are
close to each other. What the technique is doing
is it takes the data that the consumer gives
the researcher on how similar these
pairs of brands are. I said, basically what the
program is thinking is, well, if these two brands are very similar to each other
in the consumer's mind, then they must also be
similar to each other, close to each other on this map of perceptions because people must perceive these brands
in a similar fashion. BMW and Porta are
close to each other, but Plymouth and Dodge
are close to each other, but Dodge is very far away
from BMW and from Portia. That's basically what it
tries to do and it plays around until it gets a model
a picture that fits well. The distances on this
map match closely with the similarity ratings
that consumers gave the researcher and it
comes up with these maps. Then the researcher looks
at this map and says, Now, wait a minute, I'm looking at these brands that are close to each other or far
away from each other. I the researcher try to
figure out what is it? Why the consumer is thinking
that these two brands, BMW and Porsche are at
one end on the Y axis, and Plymouth and Dodge are at the other end
of that same axis. The researcher says, Well, maybe it's because
BMW and Porsche are classy distinctive brands and Dodge and Plymouth and VW are practical affordable brands. That's the way it's done. Now, I gave you a simplified Way in which this is done. There are more complicated
ways in which this is done. But that's an example of the indirect method of coming
up with these maps or what is in the consumer's
mind when they see the different brands in the brandscape in
which I compete. There's another technique
called correspondence analysis. I won't go into
that, but it's used a lot by agencies
and consultants. Basically, correspondence
analysis gives people a table where the
brands are on one side, like the columns and
on the other side, you might have adjectives or you might have endorsers
and people check a box if they think that adjective or that
endorser matches the brand and that
data is thrown into a statistical analysis package called correspondence Analysis, and that also ends up
with maps like these. Those are two different
indirect ways in which these are generated. Okay. Then we get into this
framework one more time. So looking at the bottom side, what I've just described
to you is the MR, the marketing research
types of analysis, which help you come
up with something for your brand which is differentiated
from the other brand. It's not exactly the same as the other brands in the category
because you have to have that to have a brand meaning a brand strategy that
you can go forward with. Now, looking at the other side, of the bottom row,
we talked about, you need to come
up with something that other brands cannot copy you on immediately
right away. You can say that well,
other brands can copy you on everything if
there's enough time. But at least in the short term, what can they not copy you on? You need to find something,
something special to you, unique to you, your history, whatever you have that
you can talk about. An example of that is in
the fast food sector, you may be familiar
with a brand called Quiznos and um few years ago, if you ask people, what
is Quiznos known for? What is the special thing that it does its branding
and marketing on? The answer would be, well, quiz nose is the
chain of sandwiches, which toasts your sandwiches. In fact, if you look now
at the Quiznos logo, you see Quiznose and maybe it's too small for you to
read on the screen. When below that it says, toasty. The whole claim to fame was that you could
come to Quiznos, have a sandwich customized
to you and then it right into a toaster oven and come out really hot and
toasty and crispy. That's what the whole
brand was about. Well, what do you
think happened? Their major competitor
Subway also began to buy toaster ovens
for each of their outlets. Now I can go to a
subway and I can make a sandwich and I
can also have it toasted in the subway store. Quiznos all of a sudden
had nothing that differentiated
everything that made it special was copied very
quickly by Subway. That's what you should not do. You need to find a
message for your brand, which is not copyable
quickly by your competitors. That's the idea behind
the unique and ownable, the U part of that strategy. By the way, you also need
to find something which can be communicated easily
and simply to customers. It shouldn't be very
complex brand message, and it should be something
that you can use when you're coming up with
all your brand actions, meaning all the marketing
things that your brand does must link in some way to that basic brand meaning and brand strategy that
you're coming up with. ESPN, for instance,
is a brand that's not only the leader in sports
broadcasting and so on, in terms of being the best
in terms of the information. But they also make it a
part of their brand message that ESPN has a
personality that it's fun, it's light hearted,
it's a little edgy, that's part of also what
their brand meaning is. Going back to the DRUNFramework, we've checked the D
box and we've checked the uniqueness box with
the Quiznos example. Now let's go to the other side. How do you find something
that is going to be relevant to what consumers are looking for in that product category? This is very standard
straightforward marketing research that I'm sure you've covered
in your marketing classes. What are the
functional needs that customers have in that
product category? This is from the
sports apparel and sports shoes and sports
equipment category. Somebody did this research
and 75% of people said, Well, when I'm buying a
shoe, for instance, the most important thing is comfort and it should fit well. It should be good value,
it should be durable. Right? This is what
we mean by relevance. You have to say something
about your brand that matches what your target segment of
consumers is looking for. And it has to match
these attributes that come up with this standard
marketing research. Now you'll notice that these attributes are
pretty much functional, and this is the kind of stuff that most brand positioning
statements deal with. This relevance part of the drum framework
is very similar to standard brand positioning
types of frameworks, which I'm sure you've
discussed in your classes. But then we go beyond relevance, we go to the emotional side. This is what's typically missing in most brand
positioning analysis. Because most brands,
depending on the category, most brands also meet
various emotional needs. We have to have a really
good understanding of what the emotional needs are of the customers that
you are targeting. Let's see how we do that.
What are the higher level, you can call it higher level or deeper needs that
consumers may have. Obviously in every
product category, usually people begin with
functional performance needs. If you say, why do you want to buy an SUV or why do you
want to buy a Prius, they'll give you
functional reasons. With the preus they'll
say, I want to save money on the gas. I want it to get higher
miles per gallon. If you say, why do you
want to get an SUV? Well, it'll give me more power
and strength when I drive. These are the functional reasons that people will give you. If I buy an SUV, I'll be more able
to do something. It's a functional
performance need. But then you need to go beyond
the functional performance needs that people have to
dig into the other types. You might ask them when
you consume this product, how do you want to feel? The answers might be if
you're drinking coffee, if you're a Starbucks or any
other coffee brand consumer, you might say, I want to feel relaxed or I want to
feel more energetic. Notice what's happening here. Sometimes when you drink coffee, you want to feel energetic. Maybe it's the first cup
of coffee in the morning and you're going to the office or you've
come to the office. At 4:00 in the afternoon when the day is winding down and
you're drinking coffee, maybe you want to
relax a little bit. You want to take the stress out. The same person for the
same product category, may have different
emotional needs depending on the nature
of the usage occasion. This is a very
important idea that you have to think not only of
the person and the product, but also of the usage occasion. So anyway, we say,
how do you want to feel when you use this
product, consume this product? When you drive your motorcycle, Harley Davidson, you
want to feel free. When you want to
drive your Volvo, you want to feel safe. When when you buy a
cosmetics product, you want to feel beautiful. You want to feel
desirable, right? Again, with the Harley
Davidson example, when I use this, I want
to be more masculine. When I use my Mac computer, I want to be more creative. When I'm a mother serving
my children soup, I want to be more nurturing, feel more nurturing, and so on. These are the emotional kind
things you also need to understand when you're arriving
at your brand strategy, what your brand should mean. Then on the social side or
the self expression side, how you look to
other people, ask your customer or do some
other kind of research. When I use this, I want
to look more like what? I want to look more cool. I want to look to other people
as being smart and clever. I want to look more
tough and masculine. When I drive my prayers or EV, I want to look I'm
socially responsible. These parts are very
important to really dig into the needs that consumers have and the needs are emotional,
not just functional. So how do we use? How do we dig deeper
into figuring out what these deeper needs
are that consumers have? Here's one way to help
you think through this. Begin by asking, who are my target consumers
demographically, age, gender, education, life stage, are they boomers, millennials,
gen zs, whatever. How do they use my product? What is the time of day
when they use this? What's the nature of the
occasion when they use this? At that time of usage
and consumption, how do they want to feel? How do they want to look?
What do they want to be able to accomplish and
do in a functional sense? At the time when
they're using this, do they have any
anxieties that they are afraid about that you
can reassure them about? Volvo says a lot of mothers when they drive their
families in their cars, they're concerned about
accidents and safety. That's what the Volvo brand has been built on for decades. What do you think they miss in their lives that they
wish they had more of? This can be very powerful. If you can figure this
out and make your brand symbolic of these things
that people wish they had, then your brand can become very attractive, very
motivating to them. I'll give you an example of this in a minute for
consumers in China. Just hold on for a second,
have a slide on that. What do they dream
or fantasize about? The entrepreneur who founded
the Revlon Cosmetics brand. His name was Charlie Revson
somebody asked him once, Mr. Revson, what
business are you in? He said, Well, in the
drugstore, I sell lipsticks. No, in the factory,
I make lipsticks. But in the drug
store, I sell hope. That was his ideas, and I'm being stereotypical
here, forgive me. But the idea cosmetics brands, you want to feel beautiful, you want to feel attractive, you want to feel desirable. That's what he was
talking about, the dream side,
the fantasy side. And what are people's
closely held values that's making them prefer
one brand to another? Why are some people, not everybody, obviously it's a small number of people today. Why are some people buying
EVs and Prius vehicles? What are the values?
The values deal with the climate and the environment and
things like that. If your brand becomes
symbolic of these values, that's one way to have a powerful brand meaning that will attract
target consumers. So this is the Chinese
consumer example. I once did a research project
that had Chinese consumers as part of the data and we
literally ask consumers, what do you miss in your lives that you wish you had more of? Let's just think
about this a minute. You probably know that China has very high levels of
pollution. In their cities. And so a lot of Chinese
consumers literally said, I wish I could see blue skies and yellow
sunshine because otherwise, all I see every day
are gray skies. Coca Cola launched this
brand on the top left. It's a brand of water, bottled water that
they came up with. You can see how they're showing
blue skies and sunshine. That's their way of meeting this unfilled need that
Chinese consumers had. On the top right hand side, China is a country
of 1.4 billion people living in very large
crowded urban cities. A lot of Chinese
consumers told us, I wish I had more
space to myself. I wish I could get out in
the outdoor into nature. Here you see an ad from
the North Face brand, which is visually depicting
being out in the outdoors, which is what they
miss and that's being promised
visually in this ad. And then on the bottom, this is from an ad for Adidas, a campaign from Adidas. And you may remember
that in China, until very recently, families were forced to
only have one child. So most people grow up
without a brother or sister. And so what these women were
telling the researcher is, I wish I had sisters, that I felt close to that
I could share times with. And so this was the
campaign that Arias came up with that if you work out together with these very
close friends of yours, it's like a sisterhood. That was a campaign that
they were coming up with. These are three
examples brand builders using insight and
research to figure out what their target customer
is missing in their lives and making that a part of the brand message,
the brand strategy. So another technique is
called means ends laddering. But let me just stop
here and ask if LF has any questions or
thoughts so far? I thought the
examples from China and what the Chinese
consumers were missing in their lives and
how brands utilize all that information was
fascinating. Thank you. Yeah. That was very
interesting research. A lot of people don't do
that in their research, but it's a very powerful
question to get answers to. You have to do it in
a very subtle manner, but it's a very important
question to use. It makes all the difference
when you're trying to differentiate yourself
in a competitive field. Absolutely. Now we get to a type of research technique that you may or may not have covered
in one of your classes, but it's called means ends
laddering techniques. This is a technique to
help you again understand, figure out what are
the higher level needs that people have when they make choices in a
product category. The way this begins
is you talk to consumers and you
give them well, they are different ways
to ask the questions, but let's suppose
I go to somebody who just bought a car and I say, What car did you pick? They say, Oh, I chose
a Toyota Camry. Then they say, why did you pick that over the other
brands that you looked at? They say, Well, I think it's more
dependable and reliable. So this is at the bottom
level of this picture. You see the dependable
and reliable. It's a physical attribute. Then you ask them, why does this matter to you that a car is more dependable
and reliable? They say, Well, it
means that I won't get stuck on the road with
a broken down car. And then you say, why is
that important to you? Why does that matter to you? They say, this is moving
up the ladder here. They say, Well,
there's less worry and stress therefore
that I have. Then you say, why is
this important to you? I feel more secure
in my decision. Then you push them
further up the ladder. I say, why does
that matter to you? They say, it gives
me peace of mind. So now see what's
happened is you've taken all the lower level
functional features, which could be safety,
convenience, engine performance, fuel efficiency,
exterior styling, and you moved up the ladder. To the higher level, which is what are
the end goals end benefits that you get from
these physical attributes? These are things like a
sense of peace of mind, a sense of pride,
self confidence. I feel modern and
things like that. This is a very
helpful technique, again, within a
product category. This is not brand specific, it's really to
understand the category. What are the higher
level or deeper, you can use whichever
phrase you want. Emotional needs that people
have in the category. And so this gives you an
understanding of how you can segment the category because different people have
different needs. They might be in
the car business, some people that care
more about reliability, other people who care more
about the exterior styling. And so you can segment the category into
different groups based on the differences in the needs
that they consider more important moving from
the bottom to the top. In fact, the next
slide shows you this is in the apparel category. And this team of students
working on this project, they said some people
looking for bargains, other people for one
of a kind clothing. And so for each of them on
the left versus the right, they push them up the
ladder and so on the right, people want to look smart. On the left, they
want to feel like something they're
smart shoppers, it's within the budget, it's worth the money, and so on. You get a very nice
understanding of the emotional needs that
apply to a category, to different groups of people, not just the functional needs. This is also very
helpful information that can be used in
the strategy process. So what I've understood
so far is that the brand strategy depends on the segment that you
choose to target. But how do you decide
which segment to go after and which
segment to target? Because there could be a
number of appealing segments. Exactly right. So
if I do this kind of analysis on the
screen right now, you see, one, two, three, four, five segments. Typically you break the category up into five or six segments, then you have to answer exactly the question that you asked. Which ones do I want my brand
to target, going forward. Let's talk about that decision because that's a very
important decision. So the type of segmentation
you need to do is exactly what we just
saw in the previous slide, which is based on the
needs that customers have. It's not demographic
segmentation, it's not men, women,
you know, young old. It starts with needs because the problem with
demographic segmentation is demographics may help
you communicate with people because you know what
media to reach them through. But it's not usually a one to one mapping between
demographics and segments. It's possible that
both younger people and older people
have similar needs or men and women have similar needs. So it
doesn't work like that. So needs based segmentation
makes the most sense. So an example of needs based segmentation is in this example from
a genes company, VF Gens is the company which
makes wrangler and Les and the other genes brands and actually got these slides
from them some years ago. When they do needs
based segmentation, they not only separate in the columns the
types of people, but they also look at
the types of occasion. So think about how
you choose a pair of jeans to wear and what type
of jeans you would wear. Doesn't it also depend
on the occasion? Am I dressing for the office? Am I dressing for a party that I'm going to that
somebody's invited me to? Am I wearing this on a day when I'm just
staying at home and maybe going to the
grocery store, The wearing occasion,
which is the rose shape the needs as do the type
of people involved. Both of them play a role in
the needs that people have. This is how McKinsey, in fact, does its need
based segmentation. In fact, the analysis that
VF did was done for them by McKinzie from a very long
expensive research process. But you can do this
in a much more simple minded, useful way as well. When they did this, they did this separately
for men and women. This is the chart for women. They came up with
on the columns, some people are more
traditional other people are more fashion forward and
then there are people in the middle who are what they
call the fashion follower. That's how they differentiated
the types of people. Nor if it's not demographic. But it's still types of people. Then they said, Are
you wearing it? Now we look at the left
hand side, the rose, Are you wearing it at home or wearing it for going out
on a dressy occasion? That makes a difference. Using both the occasion split and the type of person split, they came up with actually eight or nine
different segments. Then they said, Well, for each of these types of segments, what type of jeans do they
want to wear on this occasion? And what type of
brand do they prefer? What type of price are
they willing to pay? Where do they want to
go shop and so on. That's an example of
what is called creating segments on a needs
based manner. It's not on a demographic
type of manner. That's the type of segmentation you need to do one needs to do when you're doing target
analysis for branding. It has to be based on needs
and not just on demographics. Once you have these different
need based segments, this is a different example for I forget what the
category was here. It might have been clothing. You see the segment name that
was given and we have one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, fashionable
Frannie, efficient Ellen, thrifty, Tina, sensible Sam. These are names given to the needs that these
segments have. Each of these segments, there
is some demographics that are related to them
more men than women, more young than old and so on. Then how do you choose
as a brand marketer, which of these segments you should pick when you go forward? Something just happened here. I didn't close that. Oops. Sorry, I don't know what happened here. You obviously have to
do some editing here. That's okay. The second part of the, I need to go back a slide. Sorry. Right. In this chart, you can see that we have
the segments listed on the first column and then we
have a couple of criteria. Think about how we should
choose a segment to go after. I think there are two
ways to approach this. The first one would be
you obviously want to pick a segment to target where if you go
after these people, there's enough money to be made. There's a strong business
case to go after them. What factors feed into the amount of money you could
make the business case? One of them has to be
the size of the segment. I'm looking at the columns. The second is the growth factor. How fast is this
segment growing? The third one might be
how often do they shop, which actually is a part
of the size of the group. Another one might
be, is it easy to reach the people in this
segment through messages? Another one might
be, are they loyal? Because if they keep switching, if they keep looking for deals and promotions
and discounts, that's not very good
for me in terms of a dollars point of view. Then we look at price sensitivity
or price insensitivity. Segments that are more
willing and able to pay higher prices and give me higher margins are
obviously more attractive. So you have to look at
the different segments or different need based segments and rate each of these segments on criteria like
this and then end up with a net choice
of therefore, which of these segments are more attractive to go after from $1, from a business
case point of view. That's what this slide shows. That's one angle of the
segment choice decision. The second one is even if a segment is very attractive from a
financial point of view, there's no point in going
after that segment if it's going to be very hard to win that segment
from competitors. We also need to do in parallel a strength
weakness analysis. So you see here
an analysis where we have four different
fast food brands, Quiznos, Subway,
McDonald's, and Wendy's, and then we have three segments in the middle of the slide. And for each of those
three segments, there's a list of
what are their needs, functional, emotional,
and self expressive. Then the analyst is making
a judgment on how strong or weak is this brand in meeting each of these needs
that each segment has. The idea is that you try to find those segments where your
competitors are weak. Because if you go after
those segments that your competitors already are doing a good job in
meeting their needs, it's going to be
hard for you to win that segment from a strength
weakness point of view. This type of strength weakness
analysis also needs to be done along with
the prior analysis of how much money could you make if you win in that segment. You have to combine both
these considerations to choose which segment
you want to go after. It's a process that
requires data, but also a lot of judgment. To pick the target segment
that you want to go after. Elf, does that
answer the question? It does. And as you were
reflecting on this, how do we choose
the right segment? I was also thinking about, yes, size is really important. Profitability is important. But sometimes, as you know, there are trends in branding
and approaching consumers. So for a while, bottom of the pyramid consumers were
very bottom of the pyramid, marketing was very
trendy thing to do, targeting the poor of the world. But if there isn't the fit
between the brand image, what the brand represents. That segment may be
globally very lucrative, but it doesn't make sense for that brand to go
after that segment. Exactly. It makes sense for Louis Vitan to go after bottom
of the Pyramid consumer. Exactly. That's what this current
screen is showing is the fit. Do you have a strength Against that segment
versus your competitors, which will make it more
likely that people in that segment will buy from you instead of buying
from the other guys. That's the strength
weakness analysis. That's what this chart
basically shows. One quick question then. Once you decide on this segment, how do we bring
all this together? All this research
we have done on brand meaning so
that we can match the segment with the brand
meanings that we have identified and fine tune
our branding strategy. Good. That's exactly
what we need to answer. Once you've chosen a segment, how do you then develop the brand strategy for
that segment using the DRUM types of criteria that we talked about when we opened this
discussion, this session. This is how typically a brand strategy
process might work is, let's suppose you're a
brand like JC Penney, and you've done the brand
research on what are the associations that people currently have for your brand. This is made up data, but maybe your research tells you that consumers
think you are outdated, your stores are disorganized, your products are generic, they're low quality, the
brand is dull and so on. The left hand side
of this screen. Now as the brand manager, the brand strategist
have to say, if this is what people
currently think of my brand, they're not going to
come to my brand. It's not a strong brand. What do I want them to
think about my brand so that they will pick my brand instead of
competitive brands? So that is what's shown on the right hand side of this map. The way to think
about this picture is on the left hand side, we have the current
association map. On the right hand side, we have the desired
association map. What do I want people to
think about my brand, which will make them choose
my brand over competitors? That brings us right back
to the DRUMFramework. This means that I need to
put into their head somehow, create in their mind somehow the associations
on the right hand side, which will be differentiating versus competitors
will be special, unique ownable
versus competitors, and in terms of the needs of the target segment
I'm going after, they will be relevant to what their needs are and they will meet the emotional motiving
needs as well that they have. That's the same DRUM criteria. As a strategist, you need
to come up with what are the associations that they
need to have for my brand, which will make my brand DRUM versus competitors
for the target customers. That's a thought
process that leads to how you fill up
the right hand side, which is the desired
Association map. So then here's checklist to use when you're filling
up the right hand side. You want to put on
the right hand side, which is your desired
associations map. You want to write down the associations your
brand needs to have. Let's call them X and Y. You put them there
because the X and Y, which you put on the right
hand side, first of all, are relevant to the needs that you found out
through research that this segment has and will be emotionally
motivating to them. That's the R and the M.
And then at the same time, they will be associations, the X and Y will be associations that your major competitors
currently don't have, nor will they be able
to quickly have. They'll be differentiating
and they'll be unique and ownable
for your brand. That's what goes in on
the right hand side. To answer the question
that you asked, you need to look at the current associations and then say, these current associations are not strong enough for me to win. What do I need to replace them with and when I replace them, they'll be differentiating, they'll be honorable,
they'll be relevant, they'll be motivating,
and if I succeed in that, then my target segment should prefer and choose
my brand over the competitive That
becomes the end product of the brand strategy analysis. Here are some examples
of different brands. This was done by a
student team on RBs, and so they put down
on the left hand side, the current associations
and on the right hand side, the associations they wanted to replace those
current associations with so that these
target segments would in fact and the colors
refer to different segments, multiple segments, that the
different segments would pick RBs over the other
fast food options that are out there
in the marketplace. So this is the kind of final chart that the brand strategist
needs to come up with. The brand strategist
needs to say, I've done the research on what the existing brand associations are that the consumer
has for my brand. Of those current associations, some of them are fine. They need to stay. Those go in the column called
maintain on the left. I need to maintain
these associations. There are some associations that the consumer currently
has that are negative. I need to remove them somehow from that mental
map that consumers have. That goes in the right hand
side, eliminate column. And then on the third hand, there are some associations that are not there at all right now that I want to inject
into that association map. I want to add them to
the consumer's mind, and that's in the middle column, I want to add these
associations. This is how you would replace the current association map with the desired
association map. I take some A, put
some new things in, and this is the kind
of document that the brand strategist ends the brand strategy
analysis with. This is the sheet of paper you then give to your
creative people, and you say, Okay, now find tactical ways in which
you can accomplish this. If I need people
to think of me as being hassle free as a
desired association, how do you communicate that? Come up with a way to do that. Right? How do I improve
the quality perceptions, find out with ways to do them. This is where we go back to the Google example or
the Yellowtail example. This is where the creative
mind has to start working. How do I change my
name, my packaging, my product, my messaging, my website, et cetera, my social media
communications so that I can start changing what is
in the consumer's mind, from what is there
currently into what I want it to become
for my brand to win. For these targeted
customer segments versus those competitors that are analyzed in the analysis. That is the brand strategy
process as I see it and I hope that's helpful in terms of thinking through
how it could be done. Thank you, Regime. Thank you for these wonderful insights. It's been really informative.
Thank you for your time. Sure, you're most welcome.