Try to influence others
in our daily lives. We're all marketers,
whether you're a manager, motivating your team, employee
making a big presentation, activists staging a protest or a teacher trying to
encourage your students, or, like many that are
listening to this episode, an entrepreneur trying
to build a brand. In today's episode, I have the great privilege and honor
of speaking to the head of strategy at one of
the biggest agencies and most successful
agencies in the world. And we talk about how
understanding culture can give you a unique and powerful
insight into the reasons why people
behave the way that they do. You're listening to
the Band Gravity Show. I'm your host, psychology driven brand strategist K Putnam. Thank you so much
for being here. My guest today,
doctor Marcus Collins is the author of the new
book for the culture, the Power Behind, what we buy, what we do, and
who we want to be, which was just released. He argues that true cultural
engagement is one of the most powerful vehicles
for influencing behavior. Doctor Marcus Collins is an
award winning marketer and cultural translator with 1
ft in the world of practice, serving as the head of strategy at Wheaton Kennedy, New York. And 1 ft in the
world of academia as the Clinical Assistant
Professor of Marketing at the Ross School of Business,
University of Michigan. He's a recipient of
Advertising Ages 40 under 40 Award and an inductee into the American
Advertising Federation's Advertising Hall of Achievement. His strategies and creative
contributions have led to the launch and success of
Google's real tone technology. Made in America Music Festival and the Brooklyn
Nets among others. Prior to his advertising tenure, Marcus worked on iTunes and
Nike sport music initiatives at Apple and ran digital
strategy for Beyonce. Marcus holds a doctor in marketing from
Temple University, where he studied social
contagion and meaning making. He received an MBA
with an emphasis on strategic brand marketing from the University of Michigan, where he also earned his
undergraduate degree in material Science Engineering. And Marcus currently lives
in Ann Arbor, Michigan. Let's dive straight
into the conversation. And Marcus, thank you so much for being
on the Brand Gravity Show. I'm excited for our conversation.
Let's dive straight in. You just wrote a new
book for the culture. What inspired you
to write this book? I think it was twofold. One, I found myself as a practitioner hearing
over and over, you know, let's get our
idea out in the culture. Let's make sure it's
informed in culture, what's going on in culture. And I'd ask people, What
do you mean exactly? I got a lot of
different answers. And for me, if we don't have concrete language
to define a thing, we're in trouble because, A, how do we all work
together if we can't concretely agree
on what it means. Then secondly, how can we operationalize it if we can't define it well?
How do we use it? How do we harness
it? I felt that ruminating in my
mind and started thinking a lot about
that as a practitioner. It took me back to the
second reason why I wrote the book because I realized just how
influential culture is. In fact, I would argue
that there's no force more influential to human
behavior than culture. I realized this at a time that I didn't have the
language to describe it. I'm born and raised in Detroit and I did well in
math and science. In the 90s. If you
did well in math and science and you were Black be an engineer, full. And
that's what I did. I went into engineering
because that's what you're supposed to do. Those are the conventions and the expectations
of people like me. When I got to school, I realized this isn't really
what I wanted to do, but I felt like I
didn't have any choice. I felt like I had to do this. I did begrudgingly. I mean, I'm grateful
at the end of the day. But at the time, it didn't
feel fulfilling for me. And some 20 years
later while making this observation as
a practitioner is that it was culture that
was influencing me, influencing the
decisions I was making as an early 20 something, but I didn't have any
agency to do that. I said to me, Oh my goodness, this idea of culture not only influences how we think
about our practice, but also how we think
about the way that we show up in the world as
citizens of society. The better we
understand culture, the more agency we have
to leverage its sway. Yes. I loved reading through
your book because I've been teaching people to approach branding from a
psychological perspective, and I've been obsessed
with the idea of identity since I
was really young. I think my first
password ever when I was 11 was identity for whatever
reason. That's amazing. Yeah. So your book helped me realize something
that I knew intuitively, but how much culture is actually influencing our sense of
identity and as a result, our behaviors and
all of these things. So to help people better
understand what this is, how do you define culture? So culture is one
of those words that are very, very hard to define, and the scholars have
been in discourse about this for ages for
over a century. But I look at culture through a Durkheiman lens Emil Durkheim, one of the founding
fathers of sociology. He says essentially
that culture is the system of symbols, norms, and values that
demarcate who we are and what the expectations of
people like us might be. So we consist of the
beliefs that we hold, that is the way
we see the world, the truths that we
hold of the world, the artifacts that are
meaningful will be don. Uh, the behaviors
that are normative, the rituals, the ceremony,
the social norms, and the language that
we use, the code words, the interface of
how we interact, the alchemy of those things
make up our culture. And a more recent scholar named by the name of
Raymond Williams, he says that culture is the realized meaning
making system. It's the way by which
we make meaning. So that system of
beliefs, artifacts, behaviors, and language,
they become the inputs, the elements that translate
the world for us, which ultimately informs how we show up in the
world and what we do. You have an incredible pedigree. You've worked with the
most iconic brands that exist today from Beyonce
to everybody in between. Do you have a favorite campaign
or brand where culture really played a
strong role in how you strategized and executed? I think the Brooklyn Nets
probably is the one for me. Of the many campaigns
I've worked on, I'm so grateful for all the opportunities I've
had to put this thinking in the world and also be informed by the world to
shape this thinking. I think the Brooklyn
Nets was it for me because it really subverts all the traditional
wisdoms we have of marketing communications
or marketing writ large. We think about marketing as, how do we differentiate our product in the minds of people so that
people consume. We spent a lot of time thinking
about value propositions, positioning statements,
my razor sharper, my battery la goes faster. My shampoo has more body,
whatever that means. Right, and we have these
things that we typically think are the driving impetus of what gets people to move. So if you take that and juxtapose it to
the Brooklyn Nets, you see these things
completely be out of sync. Brooklyn Nets was a team that was once the
New Jersey Nets, we were moving them from
New Jersey to Brooklyn. I don't know if you
know anything about New York or your
listeners or New Yorkers. There's one thing that
New Yorkers do not like, it's anything from New
Jersey, except for, like, Billy Joel or Evon
Jovi or Bruce Springsteen. That there's not a
lot of love there. So you've got an
export or an import rather into New York that New Yorkers
inherently do not want. And secondly, we weren't
we, but the brand, the company was establishing an arena in the Atlantic
terminal area of Brooklyn, which is going to upset
a lot of residents, a lot of so there's a lot of agita there, a lot of friction. And to make matters worse. You got a product
people don't want. You've got some social unrest that's being catalyzed
because this thing. But also, we didn't know who
the team was going to be. There's a free
agency clause that happens when teams
leave one region, one location to another. But we literally didn't
know what the product was. So take that and think about
it through marketing terms. You don't have apathy, you have disdain
for your product. Secondly, it's going to create a lot of
friction for people. Third, I don't even know
what the product is. I can't even communicate
the value propositions. For a marketer,
you go, I can't do anything with this. What
do you want me to do? Instead of focusing on
the product or the brand, by the way, the brand
was not great because the New Jersey Nets
hardly won anything. They never. It's all that bad. We said, well, let's not focus on the product
for a moment. Let's not focus on the brand. Let's focus on the people,
the people of Brooklyn. What do we know about
the people of Brooklyn? We know about the
culture of being a Brooklynite is that there is immense pride of being a
Brooklynite sing hip hop, I Brooklyn in the house?
That's a real thing. Brooklyn so proud of themselves. The idea was, well, let's stoke. That Brooklyn pride
in a way that makes the Brooklyn Nets a receipt of identity. How
we're going to do this? We'll start arrival
with someone who challenges Brooklyn's
superiority in the five boroughs of Brooklyn. Thankfully, there was a natural
rival known as Manhattan. We use this inherent
tension between people, these cultural tensions
that exist between people. To position the brand not as a value proposition
rich offering, but rather a receipt
of identity, a way by which
Brooklynites could say, I'm from Brooklyn, to help
them do what they already do, to help them realize the
cultural characteristics, the cultural conventions of what it means to be a
part of this community. When we did that, with almost
no media dollars behind it, the success was unreal, unreal. I said to me, The way we think about
marketing is not flawed. Someone say it's flawed.
That's probably irresponsible, but I will say it's myopic. If we can widen our
aperture about what it means to go to market and
why the market responds, I E, why people move, the better we understand
the underlying physics of human behavior, the more likely we
are to influence it. Culture is the governing operating system
of human behavior. Yes. I love that story
so much for those who are curious to hear that
story in even more detail, I highly recommend the
book you share down to the copywriting that you used on billboards
and everything, and it was very well done. I loved this example so much. If a brand visionary or CEO accepts that
culture is incredibly important and that they need
to align their brand to a prevailing culture
to be accepted and to influence
behavior, what next? How do they start this process? Perfect question.
The first thing we start is, well,
what's a brand? I love it. I get into branding. Brands are they are identifiable signifiers
that conjure up thoughts and feelings
in the minds of people. They're vessels of meaning that conjure up
thoughts and feelings, ethics and cognitions within people with regards to products, companies, institutions,
organizations, and people. So we cannot talk about
brand without talking about meaning and what
mediates meaning, culture. So where do we start? Well we start with,
what does our brand intend to mean? How
do we see the world? What's our identity? What are the beliefs, the artifacts,
behaviors, the language, the conventions of what it means to be fill in
the blank brand? What do we stand for?
How do we see the world? Then we say, Okay, who
sees the world like us? Who out there shares
the same conviction, the same point of
view of the world? Because what happens is that when with people who see
the world similarly, consume, not because
of what it is, but because of who they are. In a lot of ways, I would argue that consumption
is a cultural act, what we buy, what we wear, how we style our hair,
if you have hair, what kind of car you drive,
what computer you use, what devices you use, where you go to school,
if you go to school, who you marry, if you
marry, where you vacation, what you eat, how you sleep, where you bury the dead,
if you bury the dead. All these things are byproducts of our cultural subscription. And if a brand, this vessel of meaning signifies who I then the brand becomes
a receipt of my identity. I use the brand to tell
the world who I am. Once we identify who we
are as a brand, we go, who's our congregation,
our community, our tribe, our network of people who see the
world similarly. Then we say, Those
are our people. That's what we're going
to talk to. We may have customers who buy our
thing and that's fine. Great. Awesome. The
East folks right here. We're going to target
those folks and how we're going to talk to them is we're going to preach the gospel. Going to communicate the
way we see the world. So that people go,
You know what? I feel the exact same way. Finally, someone said it. They go use your
marketing communication. They use your mark your distinctive brand assets to communicate who
they are to the world. And that is just
unbelievably powerful. Now, it certainly goes against all our conventional wisdoms of what marketing
communication is all about, what going to market
is all about. But that's why
science was invented to subvert the things that
feel like common sense. The better we understand
these things, the more agency we have to actually harness and
leverage its power. We're going to get right
back to the interview. For the next few seconds, I'm going to share with you my brand Clarity collective and how it can help you grow
your income and impact. If you're an entrepreneur
who feels stuck or uncertain about what makes
your brand stand out, then this is for you. The brand Clarity collective is a mastermind multiplied
by mentorship. Part online curriculum,
part digital mastermind, and it's designed
to help you get crystal clear brand clarity, so you attract more
perfect clients and grow your business. We have a thriving
community of entrepreneurs who are all smart and driven. As a member of the collective, you get an all access pass to all of my best
branding courses, as well as access to
our private community where you can connect with like minded entrepreneurs
and get feedback and support directly from
me on our coaching calls. The Band Clarity
collective is priced at just 297 per month. And after six months, you keep lifetime access
to all of the courses. To learn more and to see
if it's right for you, head over to my
homepage at putnam.com. There's a big section where
you can click to Learn More. I'll also include the
link in the show notes, wherever you are listening or watching. Alright,
let's get back. Yes, I want to highlight
something that you just said because it was so
profound when I read it. You people are like a congregation who all
believe similarly. It's not the typical
ideal client avatar or target audience. We're thinking in a
completely different way and it helps us reach people in a
way that's actually meaningful. I love that. One of the questions that
came up as I was reading, I if several brands are all competing within the
same cultural context, how do they differentiate
from one another? So the cultural context, you mean the same people? Yeah. Yeah, if we're going after
the same congregation. Sure. So we're going to the
same congregation. Now, the differentiation
comes in the distinctive assets and
the value propositions. It's essentially
throughout the book, I use religious text
because the early scholars, Durkheim, Weber, Marx, they studied culture
by observing religion. It's no wonder why we use words like evangelize the brand, because those things come
from the religious text. But think about this
with regards to a church, for example, if I am a Christian, I go, Okay, I'm a Baptist.
Let's just say that. I'm a Baptist and there are three Baptist churches
in my neighborhood. Which one do I go to
definitely I'm going to go to the Presbyterian church
because I'm not that. I already found my community. Now I find which
one feels the best. Which one resonates the most. Which one when they preach the gospel in this
way quite literally, I feel like, Yeah, that's
how I see the world. It goes from Nike believes that every
human body is an athlete, so we're
talking to athletes. Awesome. Well, how do
you talk to athletes? So now that we may have
had the same congregation, the way Nike talks to athletes are different
than the way that under armor talks to athletes are different than the way that
Adidas talks to athletes. Nike talks talks to athletes about realizing your
best athletic self. Phil Knight would say that Nike is the voice
that's telling you to keep going when you're running
at four in the morning and it's dark and it's
cold and it's wet. Nike's the person under the street lamp saying,
keep going, Marcus. Nike that's the gospel Nike preaches that every human
body is an athlete. The only thing keeping
you from realizing your best athletic self
is you on the other hand, under armor, they
preach the gospel about the underdog. It's
talking to athletes. But we're talking
to the underdogs. The people who have
been slept on, the people who have been
looked over, passed over. Those are the people that under armor is
trying to empower. Then Adidas, on the other hand, they're looking for the
creators in athleticism. But these are the people who are reinventing their sport,
reinventing their genre. You've got three
different brands, three different
vessels of meaning who are communicating to
the same congregation, but finding these tribes within them that are most akin
to who the brand is, how the brand sees the world. The people who wear
those sneakers, wear their gear, use
their technology, ascribe to their accessories, that these people use them as a way to communicate
how they see the world, not just what the brand does. Yes. Yes. Amazing. A lot of my audience
sell B to B. I love examples from consumer
brands because they typically do the
whole emotional branding. So much better than
B to B brands. But is there a difference
between how B to B brands approach culture
and assimilate with it versus one that is
reaching consumers directly? I think that's
totally fair. I mean, B to B provides a
different context. But what's the saying that
it's not B to B is not B to C, it's P to P, it's people. The underlying physics is
still based on who we are and how we cognate and how we behave because of the
way that we cognate. The only difference is
the context, right? The way I talk to someone
at the bar would be different than the way I talk
to someone in a sanctuary. We go back to religious texts, even don't talk to the
exact same person, you and I are talking, I'll use certain language, I'll
behave differently. I dress differently because
of what that context demands, what the expectations and conventions are of that context. The same thing goes
when it comes to BTB. I'm still Marcus when
I leave the office. I'm still Marcus when I'm
in the grocery store, I'm still Marcus when I'm
scrolling through Instagram. I'm still Marcus when I'm
going through Amazon, and I'm still governing
exact same operating system. The difference is the context. So we ask ourselves, Okay, how do we talk to these
people within this context? We have to be understanding
of the context. Now that's the challenge
for BB marketers and I work with the BB
too, but I empathize. That's the challenge is
that the culture that is the context in each of these
organizations are unique. When I'm talking to company A, I have to be mindful
of their beliefs, their artifacts,
behaviors, and language. I'm talking to them
like I'm one of them, I see the world the
way they do I talk to company B in a way
that is more bespoke, more unique to their
cultural conventions, much like Jus Nike's
example again, just because it's
such an easy one and it's that Nike
talks to athletes. That's their congregation. But they talk to swimmers differently than they
talk to runners, talk to fencers differently
than they talk to gymnasts. They talk to
footballers different than they talk to basketballers, even though they're targeting
the same congregation. When we're doing
B to B marketing, we got to say to this
congregation of companies, these kinds of companies, here's how we see the world. Then we go, Okay, when
I talk to company A, I talk to them this way,
Company B taught them that way, but it's all within
the same context. I think Patagonia is a
pretty good example of this. Even though we know them
as a B to C company, they do a lot of work,
at least they used to. They would work with companies
to do their company swag. But when Patagonia realized that these companies they
were working with the way they saw
the world business, their book of business was antithetical to what
Patagonia believed. What did Patagonia do said,
No, we can't work with. And you go, why would
you much money? Because we don't see
the world that way. It is not congruent
with our world view, and therefore,
Patagonia said, No. The interesting part is that
the more Patagonia does things that are against the
conventions of marketing, the business gets bigger. It's just unbelievable. Ugly. I love Patagonia
for that reason. The infamous don't buy this
jacket. How amazing how that. That is the perfect antithesis to our traditional
marketing approach. They're telling you don't
buy this thing, do not. In fact, do something
completely different. But if you have to buy a jacket, fine, buy this one, but
please don't buy this one. The thing is someone
sees that go, I love this company. They see the world
the way I do and you can have one fleece
with one logo on it and the almost
identical parody fleece right next to it. If that parody fleece
has Patagonia on it, it means more because brands
are vessels of meaning. Yes. There's some
interesting headlines happening right now and you give an example similar to this, but I think that it's different in the book when
you talk about Nike supporting Kaprinik when he was kneeling at football games, you talked about how Nike stood behind him and what that
meant for the brand. Bud Light is experiencing a backlash as well for a
decision that they made. How do brands decide
when to comment or when to participate in
a cultural movement. How do they know if it's in
alignment with their brands? Yeah, it's a great
question. When do marketers on behalf of their brand decide to
join the discourse? I say, in my mind, you do it when you have
something to say and be seen. I think oftentimes we have the sense of oh this popping, this was happening right now. I need to jump in this
discourse so that I can be seen that I
did this thing and hopefully prayerfully in Shala this ripple effect will
happen and more people will buy or people think differently
of me think highly of me. I think that's quite
performative in that way. And not that performance
is actually a bad thing. We all perform as Irvin
Guffman would say that we all are self presenting. Shakespeare says, All
the world is a stage and men or women are merely
actors on set stage. So we're all sort of putting on a performance based
on our identity, who we choose to
play in this world. But I think that the
best opportunities for brands to jump into this discourse is when
they have something meaningful to say because
of how they see the world. And you jump in when these things are in the
crosshairs of your point of view. Nike let's just use Nike because we didn't talk
about it so much. Nike can jump in on the
Caprink thing because of their stance on
athletes or Nike can jump in conversation
about what it means to be an elite woman, tennis player in a
male dominated sport. You have a point of
view on failure. These things that
seem to be outside of the realm of what
they make sneakers, footwear, accessories,
technology, and the like. But they're able to weigh in on things because of their
point of view on the world. But Nike isn't weighing
in on a dental hygiene, because they don't
have a point of view, you jump in when you
have a point of view. I mean, think about what we're trying to do when
it comes to brands. We're trying to make these emotional connections
with people. We anthropomorphize the brand. We make the brand feel human, so people can feel connected to it because
that's what we do. We connect to humans. We can use humanity, how we act as people
as a good metaphor. Would I jump in on a conversation
I know nothing about? Probably not. I've
never read on a thing. I never had a point
of view on a thing. No one's like, Hey, Marcus, what's your take on brick
mortar? I don't know. You know, it's up my alley, not because that's not my job, but rather, I don't have
a point of view on it. I think that's what
brands need to focus on who you are, how
you see the world. And when things Isagen shocks to the system
happened in the world, and we are now entering the discourse to
make meaning of it, we can say something meaningful
that is full of meaning. Yeah. Yeah. You also present in the book a
framework to think about the ethics of the meanings
that you're making. Can you speak to that a little bit as well, your framework? Yeah, it's something
that I thought about teaching at Ras
School of Business, University of Michigan, I would talk to students
and they'll say, This is very helpful. We as practitioners, we
want to be successful. However, they also
want to be ethical. They want to be morally
upright and make the best decisions, make
the right decisions. Of course, right is subjective. It is culturally mediated. What we consider to
be right or wrong is based on the
beliefs that we hold, the ideologies
that we hold dear. I tell them that I can't
tell you what's right or wrong because it's up to
your meaning making frames, how you see the world, how
you navigate the world. Here's a tool that I
use to try to make the best ethical
decisions based on my moral compass and my cultural subscription.
I call it IPO. I try to be cute because it's
business school and IPO. Anyway, IPO, it's
intentionality, intentions, perspective,
and outcomes. I ask myself, what are my intentions in
doing what I'm doing? Do I have good intentions? That is, do I mean well? Do I mean well for
all constituents? That is the company
for which I work, maybe the client for which
I'm in service of helping the community in which we are
operating and the customer, persons who are consuming, whether it's a product
good or product service or something in the
middle of that spectrum. Think about that. What
are my intentions? Are my intentions good? Did I mean well? That's
an important thing to be mindful of
because we see ads, we see communications, we see
activations and campaigns. We what were those
people thinking? Goodness gracious, they
completely played themselves. I don't think that
these people because these are human beings who are
in these companies saying, Let's offend as many
people as possible. I don't think that's
the case at all. I think instead, they're operating from their own meaning frames, their
own intentionality. That's the first intentions. The second is perspective. It's not enough to have your own perspective of the world. You have to see the world in a way that's outside
of yourself. We call that empathy, self
aware perspective taking, though I have all the great
intentions of the world, if I have the perspective
of someone else, I can look at how are these people going to
interpret what I do? Though I meant well, knowing what I know
of these people, they're not going
to see it that way, so I should not do it. There are a lot of
things that I do at home and I mean well. My wife goes, why would
you ever do this? Go, Oh, because I
thought it would be. She's like, I don't
see it that way. And if I were to
think about her, I'd try to do. Love you, Alex. I try to see you from that perspective so
that the outcomes, which is the third part,
are more predictable, at the very least are more
likely to be congruent. So we have to think
about our intentions, the perspective of
others, and the outcomes. So take my children,
for instance, because I think about marketing, not just going to
market market products. I go to market and effort people to move, trying
to influence behavior. So take my children,
for instance, I have the best
intentions for them. See something through
their perspective, I go, George is not
going to like that. Ivy is not going to
be happy about that. However, the outcome is
going to be worth it. It's going to be in
their best interest. So I'm taking into account my intentionality,
their perspective, and the potential outcomes, and that is the calculus
that's informing my decisions, the behaviors that I take on. The same thing goes with
marketers, with businesses, companies, institutions,
organizations, people, right? We start with what
are our intentions? What are the perspective of
the people that we are going to be serving or who will
be impacted by this? And then we say,
Okay, so what are the potential outcomes?
Is this going to help? And just to be
totally transparent, you know, as I look
back in my career, I realized that though I
made good decisions that had great outcomes for the companies or the brands I was servicing, it may not been the best service for
the people around me. You asked me my
favorite campaign, I go back to the Brooklyn Nets. Like, I referenced that campaign
because it really played out what I've learned as a
practitioner and as a scholar, and it's a good
case study that's evidence or suggests that
these theories are plausible. And they're one of
many proof points. But then when I also
look back, I go, it served the Brooklyn Nets and it served basketball fans and
it served a lot of people, but it also disenfranchised
a lot of people. A lot of people were hurt by moving the Barclay
Center into Brooklyn. W I make those same decisions? Maybe not. Would I made
better decisions? Absolutely. So much like culture, our ethics evolve as our meaning making
system evolves as well. Thank you for sharing that. I think that's
incredibly useful, especially for people who have a voice in the market in the world and all
brands do, hopefully. Bringing this back down, and this will be
our final question to the average entrepreneur who's running a small business, what would you love
for them to take out of this conversation
or out of your book? What are the action steps that you would love for
them to take next? First is realizing the truth is that everybody starts
at zero, everybody. Everyone starts with zero
fans, zero subscribers, zero customers, zero downloads, zero streams, everyone
starts at zero. We can look at a Nike, an Apple, or a beyonce and go, I don't have those
kind of resources. I don't have that. You're
like, Yeah, totally 100%. They've been doing it for a lot longer than you have likely. Talk about 40 years,
40 plus years. With Nike, they've been
doing it for a long time. But they started just like you, Apple started in a garage. Beyond started in her
backyard with her father. Everyone starts at zero. You're starting from the
same starting point. The second thing is that, if we want to make this thing grow, it's not going to happen because we tell people about ourselves. Other people are going to
tell people about you. That's how everything works. That is the network effect
by which we do everything. Roger refers to this
as the diffusion curve that things diffuse in a population because
people start to imitate. Right? The idea
is not how I talk to everybody who could
benefit from my product, but talk to the people who
are most inclined to move, the collective or the
willing, if it were. Who but most inclined to move? The people who see the
world the way you do. The people who are
already moving. And they just go, Oh, Fam, I've been feeling this way
forever. Come with me, right? And they go tell other
people about the brand, not because of who you are, but because of who they are. So the idea is finding out who are the people who
see the world the way we do. Who are we and who are they? Then the third part is go preach the gospel to them.
Go door to door. I mean, that's kind of the beauty
of being an entrepreneur, and I know that sounds kind
of pedantic in some ways. But if you are beyond
can't go to door to door. You can't knock on
people's doors because she would be flogged by everyone. It's impossible for
her to do that. Just like a big politician, if everyone knows them, it's hard for them to go door
to door and actually they can't make any mistakes
either or very few mistakes. But when you're just
starting door to door, saying, Hey, here's
how I see the world. Do you see it like I do? You can have much more intimate
conversations with them. And then you can arm those
people with perspective, with language, with artifacts, cultural characteristics
that help those people go evangelize
on your behalf, and it begins to propagate
within a population, which leads to the
last thing that I would recommend that
you got to be patient. Brands, meaning, takes
time to develop. Meet someone on the
street and say, Hey, Marcus, would you marry me? People go, What?
No, leave me alone. Or if your friend goes on a first date and
comes back and like, I think I'm in love,
we just got engaged. You go, that ain't going to work because you know that
trust requires more time. The same thing goes here. We're trying to build relationships and
relationships say time. They take lightweight interactions
over a period of time, the way it works is that
I meet you, I go, Oh, I think you're pretty or think you're smart or
I think you're nice. We love to get coffee.
Then maybe you get dinner, and then maybe
later you're going, Maybe later we fall in love, and then your friends
meet my friends. We could be friends,
do this every weekend. That's how relationships
are built. So we've got to be patient. Give ourselves some
grace and understand that people move on the basis
of one simple question. Do people like me do
something like this? The answer is yes, do it. The answer is no, we don't. That is the antecedent
of culture. This, my friends, I think, is one of the most powerful
things that we can harness as an entrepreneur. Mike Drop. Amazing.
Marcus, thank you so much. We barely scratch the surface
of the wealth of wisdom, stories and examples that you share in your book
for the culture. I appreciate you
making the time and sharing a bit of this with
us today. You're amazing. I'm so grateful. Thank
you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you so much
for listening to the Brand Gravity Show. I hope you enjoyed and
benefited from doctor Collins. Genius, as much as I did. If you found value in
this conversation, please take a moment and
leave a five star review wherever you listen to
podcasts. Thank you in advance. It helps other smart humans
like yourself find this show. Helps us bring on even more incredible guests
like doctor Collins, and I appreciate
it so very much. Thank you for listening, and I will see you in
the next episode.