Well, hi. I would like
to welcome Douglas Holt. Thank you for coming
here and sharing your ideas at the University
of Southern Denmark. Douglas Holt has
been a lecturer at Harvard Business School and
head of marketing at Oxford, and it's one of the
leading experts in branding and cultural marketing. So it's a privilege
to have him here. Oh, thank you. It's
great to be here. Maybe just to start
off for some of the viewers who are less
familiar with your work, could you briefly explain
what your introduction of the social and cultural perspective in
marketing is about, and what does it
bring to the table? I'll try. Yeah, I mean, marketing that I grew up in, I was a MBA and, you know, marketeer trained at a subsidiary or spin
off of Procter and Gamble. So so the classic
addition of marketing for the last 40 years or so that still dominates at a
lot of big companies, which is dominated
by a paradigm, a model of way of thinking
about branding that has, I guess it's roots in
psychology, mostly, and I call it mind
share marketing because it's the idea
this popularized in the 80s in this
book by Trout and Reese is that marketing is about figuring out
which concepts are most valued for a
particular category, toothpaste, there's, you know, clean teeth, brightness,
fresh taste. There's some concepts, conceptual categories that are associated with a category, benefits, and you want
to own those benefits. And so you do that by reminding the consumer
over and over again, you know, this is our
toothpaste. It's Colgate. And we have we will make
sure that you don't go to the dentist and you'll get the lease cavities
and tell them enough, and it will sort
of load itself in the consumer Synaps
and you end up owning this kind of
cognitive real estate where they associate your
product with that benefit, and that's why they'll
buy your toothpaste. So that was and is
how marketing still works today in most big
consumer marketing companies. That, you know,
there's something to be said for that idea for, like, low involvement, goods, incremental
differences, you know, the stuff you see at
the grocery store reminding consumers of that, you know, it probably
has some value. The problem I had
with that is that it missed when we think
of the brands that are really important in our lives and society that are
the most valuable, the most, you know, best for business and most
interesting for consumers, the Nikes and the
apples and so forth. That's not how they
work. This is very clear reflecting on my
background and, you know, selling bleach and
cleaning products and then thinking about
these other brands, there's something
very different that they are cultural symbols. They're meaningful
to people, and how they get to be meaningful to big chunks of society
is the question that we need to answer to have the right strategies
to build them. So I started out by
saying, you know, there's the kind of
strategies I grew up on and that dominate today just to give
the audience an idea. If you go to a big company, uh, you know,
unilvers Coca Colas, Henko, PNG, a strategy
document is some shape, a house, a circle, something filled populated
with different phrases, and the strategy is
that we want to own this phrase, fun, confident. So there's sort of adjectives that the brand wants to own. And that's, again, nice, but it's not meaningful
to consumers to say, you know, Coke is happiness. Um, so my so I set
out on a quest to figure out how brands that become powerful
cultural symbols, cultural icons become so and then build
models to explain, you know, to actually build
these kind of brands. And so the model that I end up with is kind
of a socio cultural model, so I'm looking at why do
symbols become powerful? Because they do work in society. They accomplish something
for our identities, for the meanings that we
collectively need in society. Why do we need
particular meanings at particular historical junctures becomes kind of
the key question. So it's a very historical in traditional marketing,
history doesn't exist. Brands are these sort of
metaphysical concepts that are hanging
out in our brains. It doesn't matter who we are,
where we are irrelevant. When you start thinking about cultural symbols and looking in media studies and anthropology
and sociology, history, you understand that actually
things symbols become valuable because they're
bringing meaning to society to address
particular issues, problems, demands for identity. And so that's, I guess, the key difference in what I do or the models I developed is looking is putting brands
back into society. Looking at them at
the macro level, not at the individual in the household, what
you're doing with it, but let's look at the whole
societal level and look at how changes in society are
creating demand for culture. I treat brands no differently
than I would think of a politician or a
culture producer, social movement
actor and looking at how they create to create
meaning that's in demand. Well, this new perspective, it demands not only
a different way of thinking about branding, but also a different approach
towards researching. You were talking
about, you know, phenomena that was
overlooked with the methods and kind of
research that we had before. So can it be done? What are the main obstacles that you find in putting
these ideas to practice? Uh, yeah, Ken. A lot of the work that we've done
academically is to build the research tools to do this
kind of this kind of study. It isn't they aren't capabilities
that you commonly find, but they're capabilities
that exist in the disciplines in
the university, if you know where to
go look for them. So, you know, putting together the right
tools are important. So so when you go
to companies today, you find typically companies
still use big surveys a lot. And when they're after
these kinds of questions, they usually do
one of two things. They say, Let's go find what's
changing out in society. They do trends analysis. Unfortunately, what
trends analysis becomes is just they have these
companies that go and find, you know, fairly superficial
changes and then sell them to all the companies here
are the ten leading trends. Might have nothing to
do with your category. Very kind of simple, and that's historical
changes trends. So that doesn't work. And then you have the companies talking about anthropology
and ethnography. But that tends to mean it
gets sort of stripped down, and as long as you go and talk to consumers in their, you know, natural environment, go
to hang out at a bar, talking about beer
in their home, talking about detergent, that's, you know, an
anthropological approach. What's missing is the kind of macro cultural lens to look at the discourses in
society that consumers are using and how things
change over time. And so disciplines like cultural history become really important
sociology to understand these social changes and understand the tensions
they're creating and collectively in society become very important
technology studies, lots of kind of interpretive
social sciences and humanities
that we, you know, think aren't scientific and aren't business
oriented actually turn out to be the
most powerful tools to provide insight for
this kind of work. So in a way, it's a very
contextualized approach, right? So a lot of people would then argue that maybe it works just in a very
specific context. I mean, you started your research with
study iconic brands. So I guess the norm the
expected question then is, is this relevant for brands that are not iconic, that
are not global, that are not big
and spectacular, but they're small and mundane. Yeah, I mean, we found
it's relevant, you know, kind what context
does, you're right. So brands and brand strategy in the kind of conventional
model is a huge abstraction. And so it seems more useful because it can be applied
everywhere and anywhere. Problem is by
abstracting to this, you know, these adjectives, it becomes meaningless
to people. So you have a
strategy that can be applied everywhere for
the next decade or, you know, millennium, but
it doesn't it's not useful. So building in context
is actually what makes strategy both meaningful, what the brand stands
for meaningful to consumers and also directs
how you manage the brand. The other problem with
these abstractions is you can make, if you think you're an
ad agency and you say, Here, I want our
brand to be fun. There may be 1,000 expressions of fun, and probably, you know, 990 of them are
wrong for the brand, but because you're
just saying fun, okay. You know, I can make a nice
fun design or a fun ad and try and win an award because you're not
really telling me what you want to stand for. So when you start
talking about what brands stand for in
more specific terms, this brand has this
ideology that's going to be meaningful
for these people in this historic moment, that gives you much more focus and makes you much
more interesting, provocative in how you engage, you know, consumers,
engage the media. So that's what's good about it. What's challenging is I
think is more figuring out, you know, what context matters, how to build that context. Not the generalizability
is not a huge problem. It's not the problem isn't
that only iconic brands work. It's actually the
smaller and more kind of homogeneous the target is, the easier it is to
do this kind of work. If you're trying to be a
mass market brand and appeal to a very heterogeneous
demographic, it's harder to be a symbol that's meaningful
to a larger group. If you're a small
challenger brand, it's often easier because then
you can use the discourse, you can sort of brand
against the big, you know, the Apple or the Nike
or the Coca Cola, and it's often easier that way. So those are actually
easy questions. The harder one usually is
when people say, Well, you know, most of
the brands I study are within a particular
national context. So what about if you want to be, you know, if you're a global
brand or international? And, you know, that
certainly makes it harder. But if you look at all the successful global
brands that are, you know, have cultural value, none of them have
done so because they have taken sort of the least common
denominator value or, you know, concept and
spread it around the world. When they do that, they
actually don't do so well. What they do is they take
a local cultural ideal, and they go cross culture. They take, you know, Coca cola represented a
particular ideology, very American post World
War two, people wanted. They sold it. Nike
did the same thing. Jack Daniels did the same thing. There's brands from Europe
that are selling in the US representing a particular kind of
European sophistication. So it's always, you know, selling or marketing
some ideology that has value because it's
indigenous in one society, one locale, and taking
it somewhere else, not sort of averaging
it across the world. We turn the tables a
little bit for a second. I mean, you're
trying to point out what the benefits of
this new approach or, you know, just this
broad perspective are, but what are its weaknesses? Where do you feel
that this approach and this whole tradition of
thinking has to improve most? Uh, well, you touched
on one problem, which is the disciplinary
basis of this approach are not common either to the type of training for people
who go into business. They don't typically have that training as,
say, undergraduates, and it's not built into
professional business education. So, you know, the right
training is required. You know, the weaknesses of the approach are what
we talked about, it's very, you
know, it's kind of complicated and
contextual and nuanced. And, you know, I
wrote a chapter in my most recent book,
Cultural Strategy. I wrote a chapter called
the brand Bureaucracy. And I think that
probably captures the weakness pretty
as clearly as I can, which is, you know, companies, once they scale to
a certain size, need simplicity and
standardization. There's, you know, rationalized management tools, you know, emerge for a reason because if you have a complex company, you different markets,
lot of product lines, senior management trying
to manage these things. You need something that I
can understand quickly. I can move around to different marketplaces without
having to rethink things. So there's a certain beauty, bureaucratic beauty
to this model where I can think of brands as these are the
three adjectives. That's all I have to
know about that brand. And if we go into Poland, give me those three adjectives,
and you can move on. So it's super simple. And this approach, I mean, culture branding by
nature is complex. It requires rethinking
across different contexts, different markets over time. New opportunities are coming due to historical change
in the category. We better start rethinking our whole brand again
five years later. These aren't things
that companies want to do or do naturally. So I think that's the weakness that weakness is particularly
though for big companies. So, you know, it's sort of counter to your
question earlier that, you know, it's just
for big iconic brands. I where this approach has the most kind of punch
and value, I think, are to entrepreneurs, SMEs that aren't schooled in the
conventional mind share approach. They don't need all the
rationalized management tools. There's huge
opportunities out there in the market that big companies
can't take advantage of. We always think of these
companies having so much, huge competitive advantage on resource R&D and
ability to you know, distribution power
and things like that. But when it comes to creating products
with cultural value, they're really not very good because of this
brand bureaucracy. So I think it's a
particularly powerful tool for start ups and
smaller companies. I mean, your current
research and books deal with question of innovation more than
what you started with. Yes. And so are these
small companies? Is that where you find
most cultural innovation? Can you explain what
cultural innovation is? Because I often we don't think of innovation
in connection. Sure. Yeah, it's just um I started really
engaging how managers, big companies think
about innovation, getting more involved
in technology, Silicon Valley and
everybody's so excited about the Googles
and Facebooks and so forth. So there's a parallel, kind of dominant paradigm in innovation that
parallels Mindshare, which we call try
and make things nice and simple and cute. So we call it the Better
Mouse traps paradigm. And, you know, it's ubiquitous. It's, you know, invent a more, you know, a convenient, cheaper, more useful tool, app, and people will come to it. You know, it's very much an engineering slash
economics kind of paradigm. And again, obviously,
there's huge innovations, you know, technological
innovations that are better mousetraps. The problem that most of us face is that
we don't, you know, the Steve Jobs come
across come around every, you know, one out of every
thousand or 10,000 businesses. What about everybody else? And so the argument
we make is that there's lots of
products and services that people think
of as innovative, even though they don't
have some great IP. There's not something
that's disruptive, that's creating a new category
on a functional level. They're doing
something else that consumers really think of as leading in a different way. And so we call it cultural innovation because
what they're really doing is they're leading
they're disrupting culture, they're leading culture
within their categories. And so even though
it's, you know, Nike's shoes were very incrementally
different than other, you know, converse
and rebox in the day. But because of how they branded, they came across as very innovative company that
people want to be a part of, and they wanted to
believe the shoes were innovative as a result. And so there's sort of this
this halo that comes from being a cultural
innovator that comes down to the product. So working so a lot of
the work that we do now is where it's really changed from what we were
doing five or ten years ago, is looking is kind of the
opportunity analysis part where we're trying to
get particularly good at spotting these new big
structural opportunities created by demand for, you know, cultural opportunities
that are created by demand for ideology
in the market. Which we think we can do
a much better job using this model than the people who are saying here
are the new trends. So other than that, it's
sort of the same idea, but it's just very
much about, you know, how do you build, you know, the next Nike or the
next Whole foods or so forth rather than figuring out how to tweak
an existing brand. What I like a lot about
your work is that it's not necessarily just devoted to business and commerce
opportunity, but also to questions of
social change and activism. So can you tell us a
bit more about that? I mean, are these
concepts and ideas also living for other? Yeah, no, I think, I mean, that's the part that
I'm most excited about. I come from marketing
originally, and I went into academia
for intellectual reasons, but also very interested
in bigger, you know, just selling bleach every day
I wasn't that fulfilling, just really interested in
social and political issues. And so a lot of the research and reading that
I did when I was a doctoral student
and a junior faculty were in literature is very
far removed from business. They're often in
social movements, politics, cultural politics. And so a lot of these
ideas actually, you know, germinated have been
adapted from these areas, and they're actually much more applicable to social enterprise, social movements than they are to Coca Cola and Budweiser. They work well for Coca
Cola and Budweiser because the norm for branding for brand strategy
is pretty marginal, but when you think
about, you know, where we get and look
for meaning in life, there are issues certainly much greater and kind of space is
much more important than, you know, beer or toothpaste. So a lot of the work
that I've been doing work with a lot of
social mission companies where these ideas are A very applicable, and
there's a number of cases in cultural strategy on social mission,
social enterprise. But certainly for social
movements, you know, what I've found is that it's sort of a space where
strategy is most needed, and if you're invested
in social change or want to work on social
issues and where these tools can be, you
know, the most powerful. So I certainly encourage those who don't
want to go work in business but are interested in better strategy for
working on social issues. This is a useful tool. So you surprised us
with two great books. One in 2004, and
then the next one, I think it was 2012 or 2011? When was it? 2010? 2010? Okay. So it's not
as recent as I thought. Yeah, I should have at least
two more up by now. Yeah. So, you know, what's the next
one? Is the next one due? Where are your ideas
pointing um, yeah, I originally, it was going
to be on social enterprise. And then I came to the
conclusion that a lot, again, the real leverage of
these ideas around social issues is more
social movements. And I've been working
planning a book on applying these ideas to
environmental movements. Um, increasingly, that's
led me in the US, at least, environmental movements are very hard to work with because there are some fundamental
political issues that need to be solved first. And so, increasingly, I find
myself working on politics. So right now, I'm
just I'm fascinated with applying these ideas
to political culture. And so it will either be a book on environmental movement or political culture or both. Sounds good. Maybe
just to wrap it up, it seems that we need
to learn more and more about not just
business but also culture, politics, you know,
society in general. So we are kind of
expected to play these multiple roles and think about all of these
different problems, even as a branding manager or as a professor in marketing. So it sounds fairly
stressful and you are one of the few people who was very successful in bridging
these different worlds and, you know, going from being
a professor to a consultant and joining these
different worlds together. So what are your
experiences with that? I mean, it Yeah, I don't
think it's stressful. I think it's once I think most people's experience
is that it's mysterious, sort of how it works,
because it is you know, it's a new discipline, a new craft that is usually
not part of business. So when I teach,
you know, I would teach whole MBA courses on just this at
Oxford and Harvard. And I'd say, you know, for the first couple
weeks, everybody's kind of confused
and it's anarchy. And then after a while,
maybe, you know, 20, 30% of the students
really get into it. So I think there's a
particular aptitude and interest that lends itself to, you know, being
good at this stuff. And it's not, you know, somebody who's, like, has
an engineering background. I shouldn't say, that's kind
of a stereotype, you know, it has more of that kind of mechanistic approach
to business, maybe really likes finance and accounting probably, you know, is not as good a fit with somebody who's more
interested in the humanities, literature, history,
and so forth, and will probably be more
able to make the connection. But I think, you know,
for most people, once they get into it, it's
really it's liberating. You know, it makes work a
lot more exciting to say, I mean, give you an example. So one of the cases in our book that was actual
consulting project is on a pregnancy test. So, you know, the managers who used to work on
that pregnancy test for years and years doing
surveys on benefit studies for, you know, do we want the
pregnancy test to be one day faster earlier in time in terms of this
measure and stuff. It was a boring, fast moving
consumer goods kind of job. Same it didn't matter whether it was that or a
cleaning product. But once we took it, we said, Look, this is a pregnancy test. It's about women, bodies, sexuality, babies.
It's about life. And once you engage
it, and that way, all of a sudden, Wow, this
is really interesting. You really have interesting conversations
with the consumers. You can think about the
product totally differently, it opens it up and makes it, you know, makes it
really exciting. And it's And also,
you learn more. I mean, it's like, you know, if you're inquisitive, it becomes an investigation
to solve a puzzle. Like, what does this thing
really mean in people's lives? Why is it different
there than there? So I think, you know, for people who have that approach to their
work and studies and life, I think it's, you know, it's an exciting thing to do. So, it's tough, but
it's worthwhile. Exactly. Thank you for this conversation and good
luck with your future work. Thank you very much. It's
great to be here. Mm hmm.