HOW BRANDS BECOME ICONS

antidote to the compression and anxieties of the networked free-agent
work that came to a head in the 1990s.

Mind share assumes that brands exist outside of history, as transcen-
dental entities. Managing a mind-share brand thus requires consistency,
staying above the fray of changes in culture and society. Iconic brands
apply precisely the opposite philosophy: The brand is a historical entity
whose desirability comes from myths that address the most important so-
cial tensions of the nation. For identity brands, success depends on how
well the brand’s myth adjusts to historical exigencies, not by its consistency
in the face of historical change.

38

CHAPTER 3

Targeting Myth Markets

DENTITY BRANDS COMPETE in myth markets, not product mar-
Ties For managers, as well as economists, this concept is hard to grasp.
Markets usually form around concrete, material product characteristics,
Economists think of markets in terms of substitutability: A market consists
of those products that consumers view as substitutes based on their func-
tionality. A television competes with other televisions based on its ability
to deliver a sharp picture, its reliability, its features, and so on.

Identity brands are different. They compete with other cultural prod-
ucts to perform myths that resolve cultural contradictions. Identity brands
Participate in myth markets, competing and collaborating with films,
music, television, sports, and books,

The first task of any brand strategy is to pinpoint the appropriate target
for the brand within a given market. In mind-share branding, the product
category is segmented according to benefits or user psychographics from
which a target is chosen. In cultural branding, managers must instead.
identify the most appropriate myth market.

Targeting myth markets can be a complicated task, for they don’t
stand still. In fact, myth markets are routinely destabilized by cultural dis-
tuptions: Symbolic earthquakes pulse through society, shattering the value
of existing myths and spurring the creation of new ones. Iconic brands not
only target the most appropriate myth market; they are also sensitive to
cultural disruptions, shifting their target when opportunity strikes, Suc-
cessful iconic brands leap nimbly across cultural disruptions by decipher-
ing the new myth markets created by the disruption and homing in on a
new target.

One especially agile iconic brand has been Mountain Dew, The hands-
down winner of the cola wars, this brand has built sales faster than any
other carbonated-soft-drink competitor during the decades of the 1980s

39
HOW BRANDS BECOME ICONS

and 1990s. Today PepsiCo sells $4.7 billion of the sweet yellow liquid every
year. In so doing, Mountain Dew has leapfrogged 7 UP, Diet Pepsi, Dr.
Pepper, Sprite, and Diet Coke. Only Coke and Pepsi are bigger.

But along this march, the brand hardly stayed static. Mountain Dew
was twice reinvented in the face of major cultural disruptions, targeting
new myth markets as they emerged in American mass culture. These trans-
formations were the key to the brand’s stunning growth.

The Hillbilly Myth

Mountain Dew was first introduced in the late 1940s and was then pulled
from the market because of a competitive conflict with its distributors. In
1960, a small Tennessee company rolled out the product as we know it
today, initially in the Middle Adantic states. Though competing directly
with the likes of Coke and Pepsi, Mountain Dew nonetheless became a re-
gional success out of the blocks, leading PepsiCo to buy the brand in 1964.
Mountain Dew owed its quick popularity to the founder’s strategy. They
used the soft drink to create an identity myth that addressed one of the
mightiest contradictions of the day.

National Ideology: Scientific Bureaucracy

American ideology of the 1950s and 1960s was deeply influenced by World
War II and the Cold War. U.S. military success—which Americans under-
stood to be caused by the precision of the military with its rationalized,
hierarchical administration; the ability of new U.S. mass-production com-
panies to gear up swiftly to support the war effort; and the massive organi-
zation of scientific efforts to win the race to develop the atom bomb—made
a convincing case that a new era had come. The national ideology lauded
scientific expertise and bureaucratic organization. Large, rationally ad-
ministered, and professionally managed bureaucracies would unleash the
power of science. Popular culture embraced dreams of technology that
would create fantastic new futures. The United States now had the secret
keys to win markets and defend the free world against the Soviet bloc,

In this ideology, old ideas about rugged individualism had become
anachronistic. To contain communism, everyone had to step to the same
beat. On the job, the employee who was mature enough to subsume his or
her individuality under the umbrella of corporate wisdom was praised.

40

TARGETING MYTH MARKETS

Outside the work place, these ideals found potent expression in the new
modern living sold by Hollywood and Madison Avenue and practiced by
nuclear families in planned suburbs. Americans saw suburbia reproduced
on television programs and in ads that portrayed men who appreciated the
synchronized routines of the new lifestyle. Paternal figures were expected
to keep their emotions and impulses on a tight leash.

Cultural Contradiction: Conformity Erases Rugged Individualism

This new ideology produced a litany of contradictions for men and
women. Men found these ideals coercive and emasculating when these
principles were measured against America’s historical rugged individual-
ism. Books like William Whyte’s Organization Man and David Riesman’s
Lonely Crowd, both of which damned the new conformity of corporate
America, became best-sellers. Soon a myth market sprang up to ease these
tensions.

American mass culture draws upon populist worlds to tell stories that
both buttress (affirmative myths) and challenge (myths of resistance) the
country’s ideology. In the period lasting roughly from the mid-1950s
through the mid-1960s, the country’s most powerful masculine myths em-
anated from five populist worlds—the cowboy’s Western frontier; the new
world of rock-and-roll; the Beats’ bohemia; the subculture of the outlaw
biker; and the hillbilly way of life.

The Hillbilly Myth Market

As the United States rapidly industrialized, the pockets that remained rela-
tively untouched, particularly in Appalachia and the South, were perceived
by the rest of America as blights. These Appalachian families—pejoratively
nicknamed hillbillies in those days—were portrayed as living a backward
rural life. As a result, many urban metro Americans perceived these peeple
as a national embarrassment that must be removed, but also as rebellious
and even dangerous figures. The urbanites projected onto these people
various innate animal qualities, qualities off limits to the corporate world.
Endowed with such potent cultural power, the symbol of the hillbilly of-
fered excellent source materials for mythmaking.

The hillbilly was used to create myths that both buttressed and chal-
lenged the national ideology. Affirmative myths made fun of the “back-
ward” life of country people, the life that the United States was now happy

41
HOW BRANDS BECOME ICONS

to leave behind as the nation came to dominate the world. The hilibilly
also became the center of an earnest and paternalistic policy discussion.
Destitute mining communities of Appalachia were “discovered” in
Michael Harrington’s best-selling 1962 policy book, The Other America.
Harrington framed for the nation a previously hidden “blight” that a
newly rich nation couldn’t tolerate. But for the urban metro middle class,
they perceived Harrington to be reporting on a mysterious tribe of back-
ward people who lived outside of time and who hadn’t yet caught on to
Tang or instant coffee.

But images of hillbillies were also used as a populist weapon to push
against the emerging ideology. To make biting social satire in his Lil Abner
cartoon strip in the 1930s, Al Capp exaggerated the hilibilly’s lack of civility.
Elvis Presley, the poor Mississippi (and then Tennessee) hillbilly who
brought black music to a white audience, oozed a primitive sexuality that
titillated young women and sent young men in search of rock-and-roll
records. With his uninhibited swagger and lascivious vocal renderings,
Presley’s mythic figure implicitly argued that real men were to be found out
in the country, away from the emasculating new norms of suburban life.)

In 1962, CBS launched The Beverly Hillbillies, which became the sec-
ond most popular television program of the 1960s. The formulaic episodes
revolved around the Clampett family’s encounters with the nation’s elites,
particularly their banker—the uptight and conniving Milburn Drysdale.
The stark contrast of these interactions revealed the Clampetts’ lack of any
sort of guile, pretensions, or social graces. What made the program endear-
ing and entertaining was that the Clampetts, living in the center of wealth,
were unconcerned about their perceived shortcomings. They continued to
wear the same beaten-up clothes, Granny made vittles and spring tonic,
and Ellie May was more concerned with critters than men. While Jed and his
clan weren’t much for fashion and fancy words, they demonstrated time and
again that they were more dignified, more resourceful, and often more
clever than the business class of Beverly Hills, The Beverly Hillbillies was a
populist allegory that championed pragmatic knowledge over book learning,
character over self-presentation, and traditional hospitality over manners.

Mountain Dew’s Hillbilly Myth

Mountain Dew’s entrepreneurs picked a name from a popular old-time
Appalachian folk song, which told of the pleasures of moonshine liquor

42

TARGETING MYTH MARKETS

known by the euphemism “mountain dew.” They crafted the beverage to
create a heart-pumping rush from caffeine and sugar and gave it a bright
yellow color and fewer bubbles so that it was chuggable. Then they created
a comic hillbilly character—Willy—who drank Mountain Dew to “get high.”
This branding was carried through advertising, packaging, and even the lo-
cation of the bottling plant.

Invoking Appalachian stereotypes like the blood-feuding Hatfields
and McCoys, the bottle’s label featured a barefoot Willie pointing his
cocked rifle at a neighbor running away in the distance. Tied to Willie’s hip
was a stoneware jug, the type associated with homemade booze. Print ads
showed the same jug (labeled “Mountain Dew”) having exploded in
Willie’s hands so that the cork ripped a hole through his hat. The tag line
“Yahoo! Mountain Dew!” was accompanied by either “Thar’s a bang in
ever’ bottle” or “It'll tickle yer innards.” On each bottle label, fictional il-
licit distillers’ names were printed. For example, “Filled by Mary & Kathy.”

When PepsiCo bought the brand in 1964, the company kept the hill-
billy character, renamed him Clem, and put him in animated television
ads. One ad, called “Beautiful Sal,” featured an all-barefoot cast set in the
country. A pair of rural Southern men courted Sal, a zaftig redhead clad in
a brief, tattered dress. Sal refused flowers from both bumpkins and tugged
their hats over their faces before she strutted away. Enter Clem. Half Sal’s
height, Clem appeared an unlikely mate. But from under his ten- gallon hat
Clem revealed a tall bottle of Mountain Dew. Sal swiped the bottle from
Clem’s flat head and threw back a few quick gulps of Dew. As Clem gazed
lustily, Sal lifted a leg and hollered, “Yahoo, Mountain Dew!” Her long
hair snapped into curls beside her head. If the audience failed to under-
stand that Dew held the power to immediately change attitudes, the muz-
zle flash that exploded from Sal’s ears sealed the deal. She growled like a
panther in heat, squeezed Clem into her considerable nooks and crannies,
and smothered him with an arresting kiss. The spot then cut to a single-
toothed old man who reached behind his head, lasciviously wiggled his
finger through a bullet hole in his hat, and said, “Mountain Dew'll tickle
your innards, cuz thar’s a bang in ever’ bottle.”

Mountain Dew created a fictional manhood that stood against the
buttoned-up emotions and routines of organization men. The brand cele-
brated what Freud called the id and what Robert Bly called, in his best-
selling book, Izon John, the wild man—man’s primitive animal nature, in

43

HOW BRANDS BECOME ICONS

which libido, violence, and sensual pleasures are unleashed, free of social
sanctions. Mountain Dew’s hillbilly was a juvenile prankster who, with a
devilish twinkle in his eye, called onlookers to let loose their wild man.

During the 1960s Mountain Dew sales took off among white working-
class people from the southeastern United States, through Kentucky and
Tennessee, through the Great Lakes states, and into the Northern Plains of
Minnesota and the Dakotas. The spread of the brand was distinctive in
that, as if by radar, it bypassed every major urban-metro population cen-
ter. Dew’s myth resonated in America’s predominantly white smaller cities,
towns, and rural areas, an area that PepsiCo brand managers came to call
the NASCAR Belt, after the stock-car racing circuit so popular in the same
regions. When Mountain Dew’s customers guzzled the sweet yellow liq-
uid, the brand allowed them to imagine themselves as a bit of a wild man in
a world in which the organization man reigned supreme.

Cultural Disruption Destroys the Hillbilly Myth

Unfortunately for PepsiCo a series of devastating national failures buried
the American ideology that provided the grist for Mountain Dew’s myth.
Massive urban riots dramatized the limitations of the Great Society pro-
grams. Japanese corporations showed that U.S. companies were hardly
world leaders, while Arab oil tycoons demonstrated the vulnerability of
U.S. economic power. The Viet Cong made something of a joke of U.S.
military superiority, and Watergate undermined Americans’ confidence in
their political system. Beginning in the summer of 1967, the hippie coun-
terculture took over the airwaves. Alongside the peace movement and civil
rights protests, the media were particularly interested in telling America
about a new cultural phenomenon, the epicenter of which was the corner
of Haight and Ashbury in San Francisco. Popular culture soaked up “the
summer of love,” and soon Laugh-In had become the top TV program, the
Volkswagen Beetle became America’s favorite car, and kids in Peoria were
wearing bell-bottoms imprinted with the American flag, The nation exper-
imented with new ideological possibilities inspired by the most radical
populist challenges of the day: the black power movement, the peace move-
ment, the hippie counterculture, and the women’s movement.

Against this backdrop, the hillbilly celebration of the wild man became
irrelevant, Instead, people began to associate the hillbilly with a more reac-
tionary strand of American politics: they were viewed as white Southerners

44

TARGETING MYTH MARKETS

who stood against racial and sexual equality (as depicted in the 1972 film
Deliverance).

Television programs featuring hillbillies, The Beverly Hillbillies and
Hee Haw, were canceled. Mountain Dew sales slid. A variety of new brand-
ing initiatives failed to stem the fall. The hillbilly was ditched for new cre-
ative ideas that placed the idea of the Dew “bang” in a variety of con-
temporary scenes showcasing current trends, but these new ideas didn’t
increase sales, Entering the 1970s, the brand was in trouble. Pepsi’s plans to
convert Mountain Dew into another powerhouse national brand seemed
to be a pipe dream.

Traversing Cultural Disruptions

Contrary to intuitive ideas that culture is constantly in motion, ideology
must be relatively stable for society to function effectively. National ideol-
ogy works something like Stephen Jay Gould’s idea of punctuated equilib-
rium: Extended periods of relative stability are occasionally disrupted by
radical changes. As citizens lose faith in the nation’s ideology, experimen-
tation ensues, historical ingredients are reworked, and society finally ar-
rives at a new consensus. When such a shift in ideology occurs, people are
forced to adjust their self-understanding and their aspirations.

New myth markets grow up around these new desires. Culture indus-
try texts that perform the most successful new myths become icons, bask-
ing in the aura bestowed on those who have the foresight and charisma to
provide cultural leadership in times when identity desires are the greatest.

PepsiCo has used disruptions in ideology to increase Mountain Dew’s
identity value, crossing cultural chasms rather than allowing the brand to
be dismantied by them. But Mountain Dew didn’t recover overnight. As
the nation experimented with these populist challenges, so too did Moun-
tain Dew, though with little success, Finally, Mountain Dew found a new
cultural toehold in the late 1970s.

The Redneck Myth

in the late 1970s a new ideology began to take shape, the Wall Street Fron-
tier, which created a new myth market that aligned well with Mountain
Dew’s prior stories. Through considerable experimentation, PepsiCo
eventually recast Mountain Dew’s advertising to perform a redneck myth,

45

HOW BRANDS BECOME ICONS

a myth that created even more identity value for the drink’s customers
than its hillbilly predecessor.

National Ideology: The Wall Street Frontier

Ronald Reagan galvanized the United States around a new ideology that
resuscitated Teddy Roosevelt’s turn-of-the-century vision of America: the
idea that the country should rally around its frontier values to expand its
global power. Reagan used the cowboy on the Western frontier as the
rough-and-tumble new hero for the economy—an idea that he argued
would, if pursued vigorously, save the U.S, economy from overseas threats,
Reagan cajoled American men to stand up to the nation’s twin threats: So-
viet communism and Japan’s economic prowess. To do so, he relied on his
many actor friends who had portrayed cowboys and man-of-action heroes
in films: John Wayne, Clint Eastwood, Charlton Heston, Arnold Schwarze-
negger, and Sylvester Stallone. Stallone’s second Rambo film—Rambo:
First Blood, Part IZ, which depicted a rebellious Vietnam vet overcoming an
ineffectual government bureaucracy to save soldiers missing in action—be-
came the signature film of Reagan’s administration.

While Reagan trotted out effective metaphors from the past, the mass
media soon retooled them to make sense of the dismantling of the U.S.
economy. Economic restructuring was led—in the popular imagination,
at least—by a new Machiavellian type of business executive, represented
by Donald Trump and Ivan Boesky on Wall Street and Dallas’s J. R. Ewing
on television. Reviving the economy seemed to require a new breed of ag-
gressive manager chasing after wealth and power with ruthless guile. Urban
professionals quickly picked up on their role as the economy’s new cow-
boys and, by the mid-1980s, were decked out in cowboy boots and heading
out to urban cowboy bars on the weekends. The media celebrated these
M.B.A.’s and lawyers who put in eighty-hour weeks orchestrating high-
pressure, billion-dollar, leveraged buyouts.

Cultural Contradiction: Yuppies Aren’t Heroes

From 1978 on, the working class faced the most rapid decline in earning
power since the Depression. Among Mountain Dew’s constituents, the re-
sult was increased unemployment, falling real wages, and disappearing
benefits. Workers’ youthful dreams of the good life, of rising pay in secure
industrial jobs, were disappearing. Men could no longer imagine them-

46

TARGETING MYTH MARKETS

selves as successful breadwinners; women increasingly had to find part-
time work to make family ends meet. Much of the North became the Rust
Belt. In places like Flint, Michigan, unemployment approached 20 percent.

From Reagan to automotive executive Lee Iacocca, leaders responded
to this crisis by calling on working men to accept sacrifices to support their
country in a time of need, This call awakened an older patriarchal order—
to “take it like a man”—and was largely heeded. Patriotism became the
order of the day. “Buy American” bumper stickers adorned cars. Work-
ing men, by and large, accepted this challenge as a duty of American citi-
zenship and sided with Reagan in a historic flip-flop of party loyalties in
the 1980 and 1984 elections. But these same men had trouble seeing the
people celebrated in the media as the new frontier heroes. These yuppies
weren't patriots (they had no problem with sending their jobs overseas),
they weren’t tough (they ate quiche and Lean Cuisine and liked to jog),
and worse, they worked hard to get their BMWs and Rolexes, rather than
work hard because that’s what a man does for his country, community,
and family.

The Redneck Myth Market

Instead, many working men aligned with emerging new myths of resist-
ance based on the populist world of the redneck, the progeny of the hill-
billy. The redneck was a reactionary, standing against the cultural changes
wreaked by the 1960s and the economic changes of the deindustrializing
United States.

In the fertile imaginations of the urban metro middle class, the rural
South constituted an insular, backward society of these rednecks. Mem-
bers of this disparaged group were thought to possess the same problem-
atic values to which the hillbilly allegedly subscribed. The urban middle
class understood rednecks as parochial, crude, and slothful. They were
backward folks who resisted the social reforms, such as racial and gender
equality and environmental protection, favored by the middle class.

The nonurban working class reversed the redneck insult and turned
the epithet into a badge of honor, following the same pattern as the hill-
billy. The confederate flag became the group’s coat of arms. A host of red-
neck myths sprang up. Southern rock arose as a popular new genre,
featuring bands like Lynyrd Skynyrd, the Charlie Daniels Band, the Out-
laws, and Black Oak Arkansas, By the mid-1970s, songs like Skynyrd’s

47
HOW BRANDS BECOME ICONS

“Sweet Home Alabama,” which spoke with pride and defiance of men who
communed around a tough, hard-living machismo, became radio hits.

In 1978, a new television series, The Dukes of Hazzard, quickly became
a huge hit outside major metros. The Dukes were an extended family living
in rural Georgia. Hunk cousins Bo and Luke built a hot rod, the “General
Lee,” from junkyard parts and Painted a confederate flag on its top. Bo and
Luke loved fast, dangerous driving and spent most of their time in thrilling
car chases, taking death-defying jumps as they eluded the corrupt local
sheriff. The program delivered the same myth, week after week: Guys who
thrived on perilous excitement—rather than dedicate themselves to com-
pany jobs—were sexy and heroic.

Mountain Dew’s Redneck Myth

PepsiCo and BBDO retooled Mountain Dew’s hillbilly from the 1960s to
deliver a redneck perspective on Reagan’s Wall Street frontier. The brand
team borrowed directly from other redneck myths, particularly the Dukes
of Hazzard. For example, an ad called “Rope Toss” (1981) presented an in-
formal teen outing in lush, hilly terrain. A sinewy young man dressed only
in brief shorts and running shoes stood on a ledge far above a river. He
waited with his young buddies for the perfect moment to swing out,
Tarzan style, over the river on a knotted rope. On the opposite bank four
teenage girls swung another empty repe out to meet him halfway. Filmed
in slow motion, he executed the switcheroo perfectly, his lithe body taut
and rippling as he released the first rope to grab the second, after which he
swung safely to the other river bank. The enthusiastic girls cheered his rite
of passage and greeted him with excited, pogo-stick bouncing. Intercut
with the action, we saw the hero in close-ups, soaking wet, chugging a bot-
tle of cold Dew. By the spot’s end, he’d polished off the entire green pint
without coming up for air. Shaking the water from his hair like a Labrador
retriever, he faced the camera, eyes shut but mouth wide open. The film
froze as he seemingly shouted, “Ahh!”

Throughout the 1980s, in ad after ad, Mountain Dew performed varia-
tions on this new version of the wild man in which the centerpiece was the
rural watering hole, The action revolved around boys peacocking for girls
by taking exciting, watery plunges whose thirst-quenching connotations
could easily be redirected by viewers in more libidinous directions.

48

TARGETING MYTH MARKETS

When corporate executives donned cowboy gear as fashion in the
mid-1980s, Mountain Dew responded even more assertively with a new
campaign called “Doin? it Country Cool.” Handsome, scantily clothed
young men still performed athletically to impress the young women who
lined up to watch them. But this time, the guys wore cowboy hats and were
considerably more clever in their adventures. “Horse Ski” began with
shirtless, cowboy-hatted guys riding horses down the bank of a river. Or so
the audience was led to believe, With a co-ed crowd gathered on the bank,
one of these guys tossed a lasso to another who floated in the water. A
horse was spurred, a “Yahoo!” shouted, and the horse raced down the
riverbed. The guy in the water (Brad Pitt, in one of his first acting gigs)
popped up on water skis, and away he went, towed behind the horse, A
dozen similar vignettes were produced, which combined to offer a power-
ful new installation of the redneck myth. Rather than buy the cowboy as a
fashion, as yuppies supposedly did with their expensive toys, these were
real cowboys, guys who were inventive enough to create their own fun,
making do with what they had. Like “Rope Toss,” these performances cel-
ebrated the virility of redneck populists, but with a message that pushed
aside Wall Street’s wannabe cowboys. Mountain Dew implicitly argued
through these mythic mini-dramas that virile guys live to play danger-
ously, not to sweat it out on the job.

Cultural Disruption Destroys the Redneck Myth

Mountain Dew’s story of virile, athletic working-class guys who had access
to a type of manhood unavailabie to the flaccid, indulgent Wall Street yup-
pie had traction as long as American ideology heroized Wall Street’s buc-
caneers. But, in 1987, the nation became rapidly disenchanted with the
Wall Street frontier as Reagan left office, scandals rocked Wall Street, and
the stock market crashed. The quest to hoard the most goodies did not jibe
with the frontier ethos, Neither did the fact that privileged insiders were
the stars of the economy, rather than the adventurous entrepreneurs
Promised by Reagan. A deluge of popular books and films like Barbarians
at the Gate and Wall Street, which excoriated arbitrageurs for their greed
and indulgence, punctuated the end of this era. As a new, more aggressive
and more individualistic version of the frontier ethos took hold, Mountain
Dew’s redneck myth shrunk to naive irrelevance like the hillbilly myth before,

49
HOW BRANDS BECOME ICONS

The Slacker Myth

Responding to this disruption, PepsiCo ditched Mountain Dew’s redneck

myth and worked with BBDO to experiment with new advertising. Three
years of trial-and-error finally yielded a new myth that addressed new con-
tradictions faced by Mountain Dew’s constituents.

National Ideology: The Free-Agent Frontier

As Wall Street finished dismantling the conglomerates in the late 1980s, a
new organization form—the networked firm—began to take shape. These
especially agile companies continued to outsource production on a global
basis. They also aggressively outsourced all other functions that were not core
to the firm’s business, boldly invested in technology to replace labor costs,
and used process engineering techniques to rationalize white-collar work.
Workers of ali stripes now faced a Hobbesian, winner-take-all labor market.
Every company job was up for grabs to the most talented and most tenacious
worker, as firms threw out seniority systems in favor of performance-driven
meritocracies.

As this new economy emerged, a turbocharged version of Reagan’s
frontier myth took hold, this one lauding heroic individual achievement.
Gone were Wall Street’s buccaneers. In their place came the most success-
ful adventurers, entrepreneurs, and athletes. The United States celebrated
heroic individual achievement, explorers who conquered new territory,
and athlete’s victories in the most competitive battles. Michael Jordan and
his brand of in-your-face NBA basketball was the iconic hero of the time.
Professionals no longer savored expensive dining and Rolexes. Now they
groomed their bodies for heated competition by heading into the wilder-
ness for tests of will against white water and mountains. Sport utility vehi-
cles exploded in popularity, and Montana ranches were the new frontier
dream. The aptly named Ford Explorer told us that life had no boundaries.
One’s manhood was revealed in the tackling of extremely difficult and
sometimes dangerous challenges, which demanded both mental and phys-
ical toughness.

Cultural Contradiction: Manhood via Work Is a Joke

This new version of the frontier galvanized managers and professionals in top
positions, as well as those who competed for these positions. But many

50

TARGETING MYTH MARKETS

workers were pushed into a secondary labor market with depressed wages and
no job security and into service-economy work that promised a serial pro-
gression through stifling, micromanaged McJobs. The lower tier of middle-
class jobs was pinched by these forces as well. Continual downsizing and
restructuring transferred workers’ stress from the shop floor to the office.
College no longer guaranteed a professional career. Working hard to pursue
a solid career became increasingly like playing the lottery, a game with poor
odds in which the distance between winning and losing widened each year.
Tensions between the free-agent frontier and the realities of work were
extraordinary. At the moment when many young men were moving into
jobs as telemarketers and retail clerks, mass culture was lauding executives
who conquered markets, technology, white water, and rock walls, all in a
week’s work. To make matters worse, in households across the United States,
parents pushed even harder to keep their children’s hearts and minds ded-
icated to making it in this fiercely competitive job market.

Popular TV programs like Roseanne and The Simpsons expressed a
new cynicism toward work and corporations. The cartoon strip Dilbert,
which satirized the McJob life, became the nation’s favorite. Populist dia-
tribes from the likes of Rush Limbaugh, Pat Buchanan, Jerry Brown,
Howard Stern, and Ross Perot attracted millions of fans.

Parents’ insecurities created a new epithet: slackers. They applied this
term to Peter Pan—like young adults who would rather pursue quixotic
cultural activities than grow up and become serious about a career. Slackers
were caricatured as directionless zombies lacking the maturity to accept
adult challenges.

This epithet was a double whammy for youths lacking good career
Prospects. First, the nation now championed executives and celebrities
with the physical vigor and daring-do that was previously ascribed to the
working class. At the same time, being called a slacker was a sucker punch.
Youths were responding rationally to downshifted economic incentives by
investing less energy in work and education, yet society told them that they
were immoral for doing so. These tensions produced a tremendous swell
of demand for myth products capable of reconciling these new tensions.

The Slacker Myth Market

An enormous myth market sprang up to feed these anxieties, reclaiming
the slacker as a hero of sorts. In his quasi-novel Generation X, Douglas

51

HOW BRANDS BECOME ICONS

Coupland provided an ironic slacker lexicon (such as Mcfobs) and envi-
sioned the heroic possibilities of pushing as far away from the new work
ethos as possible. The same year, Richard Linklater’s documentary,
Slacker, told a compelling story of a community of quirky, charming folks
who come together around their lack of interest in pursuing the American
Dream. Television networks like Fox, MTV, and ESPN2 quickly picked up
on the slacker ethos and delivered programming that emphasized what
would become the key tenets: do-it-yourself, melodramatic iconoclasm,
extreme manhood, and recycling pop culture.

Do-it-yourself: Rather than the rule-bound, domineering com-
petitions found in professional team sport leagues like the NBA,
slacker culture favored do-it-yourself (DIY), improvisational
athletics, new sports that participants pursued with a minimum of
corporate interference. Skateboarders, for instance, favored outdoor
spaces many nonskaters would find dangerous: concrete staircases
and embankments, tall curbs, ramps, fountains, and sculptures. They
sought public spaces—access to which was free but often forbidden—
to scrape their beards down handrails and flip from statues in the
town square.
The DIY sensibility applied to music and other entertainment,

as well. Rock and roll had always been DIY. Surf started as outlaw
music, as did the rockabilly rockers of the 1950s and the psychedelic
movement of the 1960s. But these once marginal genres soon became
part of mass culture and big business. Not until the 1970s punk move-
ment, ignited by the Ramones in the United States and the Sex Pistols
in the United Kingdom, did we see a defiantly DIY movement that
took on resistance to mass market-commodification as central to its
ethos. This idea took root in the American indie (independent) music
scene of the 1980s and finally burst into national attention with the
meteoric rise of Nirvana in the early 1990s. The DIY aesthetic asserted
that, rather than listening to a Janet Jackson CD, youths should make
their own music. Slacker culture found synergy with its urban African
American analog, hip-hop, in which anyone with a turntable and some
old records could make vital music; anyone could be a musician.

Melodramatic iconoclasm: Slacker culture ripped apart the most
cherished values and norms of American ideology. The Simpsons

52

TARGETING MYTH MARKETS

launched a genre that dominated youth TV in the 1990s. Other offer-
ings in the genre included Beavis and Butthead, Wayne’s World, South
Park, Jackass, and the tabloid talk shows, led by Jerry Springer and
Jenny Jones. Pleasure now came from grossly violating the norms of
middle-class society for a good laugh. Whereas 1960s counterculture
experimented with new norms, slacker took a more nihilist tact,
sneering at civility rather than revolutionizing it.

Extreme manhood: The slacker took the masculine expressions of the
new American ideology—competing in the toughest contests and
willingness to take on risk—and turned up the adrenaline to a melo-
dramatic extreme. So-called extreme sports became the rage, with
MTV and ESPN promoting “sports” that featured guys fearlessly
risking bodily harm to perform crazy, never-before-attempted stunts.
All-star wrestling on WWF Smackdown! became a top entertainment
choice of the day. And ultraviolent video games allowed guys to
spend hour after hour reveling in manhood fantasies.

Recycling pop culture: What marketers called retro consumption in
television, fashion, and music was deeply inspired by DIY, In the late
19708, the DIY counterculturalists had begun rummaging through
artifacts of the postwar culture, finding kitschy clothes, peculiar
home decor, and odd music genres that marketers had bypassed.
Later, slackers added television programs and esoteric film genres to
the list. The underlying aesthetic, regardless of the particular style in
play, was the same. Rather than accept what corporations marketed,
slacker counterculturalists reclaimed what had been discarded as
worthless. In the ultimate act of one-upsmanship, slackers showed
corporations that they could take the most worthless stuff and make
it valuable with the power of their creativity and imagination. No
marketing needed, thank you. The hit 1993 movie Wayne’s World
moved this idea from the underground to youth culture, proposing
an ironic, DIY one-upsmanship over corporate marketing. In the
same period, the rock band Nirvana broke through with its anthemic
jab at youth branding, “Smells Like Teen Spirit.” The massive hit in
which Kurt Cobain taunted marketers and the mass media—“here we
are now, entertain us”—~in the end told them to go away: “Oh well,
whatever, never mind.”

53
HOW BRANDS BECOME ICONS

Mountain Dew’s Slacker Myth

Mountain Dew’s redneck myth was reformulated to speak from within the
new populist world of the slacker. A hugely successful ad campaign, featur-
ing the tag line “Do the Dew,” drew on the plethora of source material
available in the slacker myth market. An ad called “Done That” was the first
breakthrough. The spot opened with a hair-raising shot of a guy jumping
off the edge of a cliff to take a free fall toward the narrow canyon’s river
bottom. Accompanied by a thrashy metal soundtrack, a stomach-tightening
shot trailed behind the jumper’s feet as he fell away from the cliff. The
music stopped abruptly and the camera zoomed toward four young men,
dressed like low-rent gym rats, standing in the Mojave Desert. The guys
hung on each other in a kind of casual street camaraderie. In rapid succes-
sion each mugged for the camera and commented on the skydiving the
viewers had just seen: “Done that.” “Did that.” “Been there.” “Tried that.”

The camera returned to live action, following an athlete diving off a
twenty-foot waterfall on a boogie board and “surfing” the rapids on his
belly. The four dudes returned, still among Mojave cacti, and quickly an-
nounced their boredom with that high-risk activity. The dudes’ dismissive
words painted only half the picture. Their cocky body language betrayed
no fear of the camera; each leaning toward it to make absolutely certain that
no one could mistake his feelings. The guys, parodying the testosterone-
induced jockeying of young bucks in business, played at being cocksure
daredevils for kicks.

The loud soundtrack resumed as abruptly as it had stopped as the
camera cut to a Mountain Dew dispensing machine in a jungle setting.
“Whoa!” “Never did it.” “Never guzzled it.” Dew cans blasted like cannon
shells from the machine’s delivery slot. Each dude snatched a can from the
air and chugged it down under the desert sun. Sated, they repeated in rapid
succession: “Did it.” “Done it.” “Liked it.” “Loved it.”

In the three sequels that followed, the stunts became increasingly fan-
tastic and absurd: water skiing behind a helicopter past icebergs in the
North Pole, in-line skating off the Sphinx in Egypt, wrestling an alligator in
the Amazon, taking a platform jump off London’s Big Ben clock tower.
With less preposterous stunts, the dudes’ tastes became fickle. After a skier
shot off of a cliff and fell precipitously with no landing in sight, he somer-

TARGETING MYTH MARKETS

saulted and opened a parachute. The dudes appeared in front of a sun-
washed sand dune to dismiss the move: “Blasé.” “Passé,” “Okay.” “Cliché.”
Arock climber rappelled head-first, a mountain biker leaped in front of a
wall of flames, a surfer launched off a desert sand dune, a scuba diver
hand-fed a voracious shark, and a snowboarder tumbled mercilessly head
over heels down a steep slope, but the dudes’ posturing grew only more ag-
gressively indifferent: “Obvious.” “Frivolous.” “Tedious.” “What a wuss!”

Why were these ads so commanding? The celebrated spots used ex-
treme sports with dramatic action film cinematography, but so had prior
Mountain Dew ads, with little impact. The campaign’s success was due to
how the ads presented these daredevil stunts. With this campaign, Moun-
tain Dew’s redneck ethos was revamped into the vernacular of the slacker.
Three slacker elements woven into the mix made all the difference.

First, the extreme sports were presented as DIY quests, not as compe-
titions. The most admired protagonists weren’t the most buff or competi-
tive athletes, but the most creative guys who pursued their dangerous
quests as whimsical art. In the land of Dew, guys played a game of goofy
one-upsmanship, in which nothing mattered except inventing the craziest
and most death-defying stunts, The ads suggested that although profession-
als may have thought themselves as heroes through their world-changing
innovations and their weekend warrior escapades, they took themselves
way too seriously and possessed little imaginative flair. The dudes even
used corporate buildings as their playgrounds to emphasize the point.

Second, the Dew guys didn’t just face down dangerous situations that
came their way. They sought out insane risks, well beyond what the ide-
ology was then serving up. They lived for the adrenaline thrill of life-
threatening feats. This posturing upped the ante on risk taking to absurd
levels, which, in the end, made fun of the whole idea that manhood has
anything to do with such feats.

Finally, the ultimate heroes of the ads were not extreme-sports enthu-
siasts or even the whacked-out slacker extremists. In Mountain Dew’s
warped worldview, the people with real power were consumers who as-
serted peculiar tastes. The Dew dudes weren’t particularly athletic. But as
extreme-sport connoisseurs, they had nuanced opinions about great
stunts. And they enforced these standards as exacting gatekeepers, like
Olympic judges. Slackers had no power as workers. But they could assert

55
HOW BRANDS BECOME ICONS

their will over companies and their managers by exercising their opinions.
Mountain Dew’s new view of manhood proclaimed, with heavy satire, that
guys who had lost out in the new labor market still had potency because
they could hold court with their ultrachoosy tastes. They could force com-
panies to respond to their every whim.

How Myth Markets Work

PepsiCo and BBDO built Mountain Dew into an extraordinary financial
success because they twice reinvented the brand’s myth. Each time Ameri-
can ideology shifted, the brand located a new cultural contradiction that
had created anxieties for its constituency: from masculine conformity, to
the celebration of yuppies as America’s heroes, to the preposterous ideals
of hyperaggressive masculinity in a dreadful labor market. Myth markets
formed around each of these tensions, which drew from populist worlds:
hillbillies, then rednecks, then slackers. The culture industries mined these
populist worlds to create identity myths. And Mountain Dew did likewise
(figure 3-1).

The first step in a cultural strategy is to map out the myth markets cur-
rently in play in popular culture and to target the myth market most ap-
propriate for the brand.” To do so, managers need to understand the three
basic building blocks of a myth market: national ideology, cultural contra-
dictions, and populist worlds.

FIGURE 31

Mountain Dew’s Myth Reinvented Across Three Myth Markets

| Scientific bureaucracy | Wall Street frontier | | Free-agent frontier “|

Hiltbilly myth market

uondrusig

i>
s

Redneck myth market ES Slacker myth market
Oo

Mountain Dew’'s

Mountain Dew’s
Redneck Myth

Mountain Dew’s
Slacker Myth

TARGETING MYTH MARKETS

National Ideology

Nations require a moral consensus to function. Citizens must identify with
the nation, accept its institutions, and work toward its betterment. Nations
are organized around a set of values that defines what is good and just.
These moral imperatives propel people to pursue national goals as they
strive to meet society’s definition of success and respect. This is national
ideology, a system of ideas that forges links between everyday life—the as-
pirations of individuals, families, and communities—and those of the na-
tion. To be effective, a nation’s ideology can’t be coerced or learned as
though from a textbook. Rather, it must be deeply felt, taken for granted as
the natural truth. National ideology is usually the most powerful root of
consumer demand for myth; though national ideology often intersects and
competes with other bases of group identity, especially religion and ethnicity.

Ideology is never expressed directly, as a declarative statement. In-
stead, ideologies are conveyed through myths. A variety of American
myths are critical for the nation to function: the self-made man (which ad-
dresses the path to the country’s idea of success grounded in economic sta-
tus), the frontier (which addresses the nation’s mission to “civilize” other
peoples of the world into its utopian ideals), the melting pot (which ex-
presses ideals about how immigrants can integrate into society), and so
forth, Far and away the most important myths concern how citizens are
linked to the nation-building project: how Americans, as individuals, see
themselves as part of the team to build the nation’s economic and political
power. These myths are usually constructed around ideals of individual
success and manhood—what it takes to be a man. Tracing the evolution of
such myths as they are updated to address contemporary social issues is
central to charting myth markets.

Cultural Contradictions

Americans don’t naturally inhabit the nation’s ideology simply because
they are citizens of the United States. Rather, it takes work to build these
identifications, And life circumstances can make it easier or harder to do
so. Many people aspire to the nation’s ideals, but have trouble seeing how
their lives match up.

These tensions between ideology and individual experience produce
intense desires and anxieties, fueling demand for symbolic resolutions that

57
HOW BRANDS BECOME ICONS

FIGURE 3-2

The Structure of a Myth Market

| ~ National Ideo!
|__National Ideology _ [Populist Words |

Source material

Cultural a
i Contradiction \ Identity Myths |
Ae (experienced as desires a (film, music, politics, ads, etc.)
“and anxieties) ~

|
| (varies by social position)

smooth over the tensions. National ideologies create models for living. The
distance between that model and everyday life acts as a cultural engine,
creating demand for myths that manage these differences.

These tensions are particularly acute when the nation’s ideology
shifts.’ Periods of cultural ferment produce myriad contradictions, which
in turn create veins of intense consumer anxieties and desires that ripple
throughout society (figure 3-2).

Populist Worlds

Myths rely on populist worlds as raw ingredients. Mountain Dew em-
ployed the populist worlds of the hillbilly, the rebel, and then the slacker,
as did other cultural products in these eras. Populist worlds are groups that
express a distinctive ideology through their activities. They are potent cul-
tural sites because the public perceives that populist world ideologies are
authentic. This perceived authenticity stems from three characteristics:

1. Populist worlds are perceived as “folk cultures”—their ethos is the
collective and voluntary product of their participants. The ethos has
not been imposed upon them.

2. The activities within the populist world are perceived as intrinsically
valuable to the participants. They are not motivated by commercial
or political interests.

58

TARGETING MYTH MARKETS

3. Reinforcing these perceptions, populist worlds are often set in places
far removed from centers of commerce and politics. For worlds that
have been commercialized (sports and music are key examples), these
populist perceptions are much harder to maintain because the partic-
ipants must fight off the commercial attributions.

Populist worlds are places where the public assumes that people’s actions
are motivated by belief instead of interest. The source materials for American
myths exist wherever populism takes its most authentic form. Populism
thrives wherever people are thought to act according to their own beliefs
rather than have their actions shaped by society’s institutions: on the frontier,
in bohemia communities, in rural backwaters, in immigrant and African
American neighborhoods, in youth subcultures. Of late, childhood has be-
come one of the most powerful populist worlds used for brand myths,

Populist worlds supply the raw ingredients that iconic brands draw on
to create their myths. The people who consume these myths rarely inhabit
the populist world. Rather, the myth provides them with an imaginary
connection to the world. The authenticity of these populist worlds gives
the myth credibility. Because the myth is grounded in a populist world, its
consumers believe that it is not entirely fictional. Implicitly, they think
“There are people in the world who really live this way, so I can bring some
of these values into my own life.”

Myth Markets

Contradictions in the national ideology create myth markets. A wide variety
of cultural products compete to provide the most compelling myths; sto-
ries that will provide symbolic sustenance to shore up the contradiction.
At any given time in American society, there are a number of acute cultural
contradictions. And each contradiction spawns a distinctive myth market.

Think of myth markets as implicit public conversations centered
around the national ideology. This ideology is taken up bya variety of con-
tenders with different viewpoints. By contenders, I mean popular culture
in all its forms: films, television programs, music, books, magazines, news-
Papers, sports, politics, talk radio, video games, and, of particular interest
here, brands, We usually think of popular culture as light entertainment
and a record of current events, economically important but culturally triv-
ial. Most of the time, this characterization is true. Myths, on the other

59
HOW BRANDS BECOME ICONS

hand, are much more than mere entertainment or news; they are the pri-
mary medium through which we participate in the nation’s culture. Like
other cultural products, a brand performs myths through its associated
stories, primarily through advertisements. Then, as the customers ritually
consume the product, they relive these stories,

Iconic brands rarely develop their myths from wholly original cloth.
Rather, these brands typically borrow and add to existing myths circulated
by other cultural products. Generally parasitic, an iconic brand seldom
competes head-on with other cultural products—films, television, and the
like. In terms of myth performances, brands can never compete with films,
politicians, or musicians. Even the best sixty-second ad (say, Nike’s “Revo-
lution” or Apple’s “1984”), can’t compete with John Wayne’s films, Ronald
Reagan’s speeches, or Kurt Cobain’s songs and concerts.

But brands have an advantage over these more ephemeral figures in
that they provide a material connection to the myth. Because brands load
the myth into products used every day, brands can provide for ritual action
(the ability to viscerally experience the myth through one’s actions) in a
way that a poster in a bedroom or an occasional gathering for a rally or
concert cannot.

With only a handful of exceptions (Volkswagen and Nike stand out),
brands do not so much originate new expressive culture as they recycle
materials placed into circulation by other media (e.g., film, television,
music, journalism, books). Mountain Dew’s hillbilly myth borrowed from
the Li’l Abner cartoon (e.g., stereotypes about drinking moonshine and
running barefoot) and was informed by other contemporaneous myths,
like The Beverly Hillbillies. Likewise, Mountain Dew’s redneck myth was
substantially influenced by, and played off, the television program The
Dukes of Hazzard. And the brand’s slacker myth was tremendously influ-
enced both by Wayne’s World and by MTV’s portrayal of extreme sports.
Iconic brands leap into emerging myth markets usually led by other mass-
cultural products. That said, chapter 4 explains that iconic brands do not
merely imitate. They develop a distinctive point of view and aesthetic as
they recycle these cultural materials,

Myth markets eventually crumble when cultural disruptions hit. As a
result, iconic brands remain iconic only if they abandon their old myth
and invent a revised version that taps into a new myth market. Mountain

60

TARGETING MYTH MARKETS

Dew has maintained its iconic hold across dramatically different periods
in American culture because—as the nation’s ideology shifted from
scientific-bureaucracy to Wall Street frontier to free-agent frontier—the
brand reinvented its myth to target a new contradiction that each ideol-

ogy produced.

61

OEE

